
Kezzig Klackwhistle straightened from where he’d been kneeling
for what felt like at least a decade, placing his big green hands on
the small of his back and grimacing at the ensuing cascade of pops. He
licked his dry lips and looked around, squinting against the blinding
sunlight and mopping his bald head with a sweat-stiff kerchief. Here
and there were tightly clustered swirling swarms of insects. And of
course the sand, everywhere, and most of it probably going to end up
inside his underclothes. Just as it had yesterday. And the day before.
Man, Silithus was an ugly place.
Its appearance had not been improved in the slightest by the
gargantuan sword an angry titan had shoved into it.
The thing was massive. Ginormous. Colossal. All the grand and
fancy and multisyllabic words goblins smarter than he could possibly
throw at it. It had been plunged deep into the heart of the world, right
here in scenic Silithus. The bright side, of course, was that the
enormous artifact provided a great deal of what he and the other
hundred or so goblins were searching for right this very moment.
“Jixil?” he said to his companion, who was analyzing a hovering
rock with the Spect-o-Matic 4000.
“Yeah?” The other goblin peered at the reading, shook his head, and
tried again.
“I hate this place.”
“Ya do? Huh. It speaks well of you.” Glaring at the piece of
equipment, the smaller, squatter goblin smacked it soundly.
“Ha ha, very funny,” Kezzig grumbled. “No, I mean it.”
Jixil sighed, trudged to another rock, and began to scan it. “We all
hate this place, Kezzig.”
“No, I really mean it. I’m not cut out for this environment. I used to
work in Winterspring. I’m a snow-loving, snuggle-by-the-fire, hollyjolly kinda goblin.”
Jixil threw him a withering glance. “So what happened to bring you
here instead of staying there, where you weren’t annoying me?”
Kezzig grimaced, rubbing the back of his neck. “Little Miss Lunnix
Sprocketslip happened. See, I was working in her mining supply shop.
I’d go out as a guide for the occasional visitor to our cozy little hamlet
of Everlook. Lunny and I kinda…yeah.” He smiled nostalgically for a
moment, then scowled. “Then she goes and gets her nose out of joint
when she caught me hanging around Gogo.”
“Gogo,” Jixil repeated in a flat voice. “Gee. I wonder why Lunnix
would get upset with you hanging around a girl named Gogo.”
“I know! Gimme a break. It gets cold up there. A guy has to snuggle
by the fire now and then or he’ll freeze, am I right? Anyway, that place
suddenly got hotter than here at midday.”
“We got nothing here,” Jixil said. He’d obviously stopped paying
attention to Kezzig’s description of his Winterspring plight. Sighing,
Kezzig picked up the huge pack of equipment, slung it easily over his
shoulders, and lugged it over to where Jixil still was hoping for
positive results. Kezzig let the bundle drop to the earth, and there
came the sound of delicate pieces of equipment clanking perilously
against one another.
“I hate sand,” he continued. “I hate the sun. And oh boy, do I really,
really hate bugs. I hate the little bugs, because they like to crawl into
your ears and up your nose. I hate the big bugs because, well, they’re
big bugs. I mean, who doesn’t hate that? It’s kind of a universal hate.
But my particular hate burns with the light of a thousand suns.”
“I thought you hated suns.”
“I do, but I—”
Jixil suddenly stiffened. His magenta eyes widened as he stared at
his Spect-o-Matic.
“What I meant was—”
“Shut up, you idiot!” Jixil snapped. Now Kezzig was staring at the
instrument, too.
It was going insane.
Its little needle flipped back and forth. The small light at the top
flashed an urgent, excited red.
The two goblins looked at each other. “Do you know what this
means?” Jixil said in a voice that trembled.
Kezzig’s lips curved in a grin that revealed almost all of his jagged
yellow teeth. He curled one hand into a fist and smacked it firmly into
the palm of the other.
“It means,” he said, “we get to eliminate the competition.”
R
ain fell on the somber throngs making their way to Lion’s Rest as
if even the sky wept for those who had sacrificed their lives to
defeat the Burning Legion. Anduin Wrynn, king of Stormwind, stood a
few steps back from the podium where he soon would be addressing
mourners of all the Alliance races. He watched them silently as they
arrived, moved to see them, loath to speak to them. He suspected that
this service honoring the fallen would be the most difficult he had
endured in his relatively short life not just for the other mourners but
for himself; it would be held in the shadow of his father’s empty tomb.
Anduin had attended far, far too many ceremonies honoring the
casualties of war. As he did each time—as, he believed, every good
leader did—he hoped and prayed that this one would be the last.
But it never was.
Somehow there was always another enemy. Sometimes the enemy
was new, a group springing up seemingly out of nowhere. Or
something ancient and long-chained or buried, supposedly
neutralized, rising after eons of silence to terrorize and destroy
innocents. Other times the enemy was bleakly familiar but no less a
threat for the intimacy of the knowledge.
How had his father met those challenges time after time? Anduin
wondered. How had his grandfather? Now was a time of relative quiet,
but the next enemy, the next challenge, doubtless would arrive all too
soon.
It had not been all that long since Varian Wrynn’s death, but for the
great man’s son it felt like a lifetime. Varian had fallen in the first real
push of this latest war against the Legion, apparently slain as much by
betrayal from a supposed ally, Sylvanas Windrunner, as by the
monstrous, fel-fueled creatures vomited forth from the Twisting
Nether. Another account, from someone Anduin trusted, contested
that version, suggesting that Sylvanas had had no other choice. Anduin
was not sure what to believe. Thoughts of the cunning and treacherous
leader of the Horde made Anduin angry, as they always did. And, as
always, he called on the Holy Light for calmness. It did not serve to
harbor hatred in his heart even for such a deserving enemy. And it
would not bring back his father. Anduin took comfort in knowing that
the legendary warrior had died fighting and that his sacrifice had
saved many lives.
And in that fraction of a second, Prince Anduin Wrynn had become
king.
In many ways, Anduin had been preparing for this position all his
life. Even so, he was keenly aware that in other, very important, ways,
he hadn’t truly been ready. Maybe still wasn’t. His father had loomed
so large not just in the eyes of his youthful son but in the eyes of
Varian’s people—even in the eyes of his enemies.
Dubbed Lo’Gosh, or “ghost wolf,” for his ferocity in battle, Varian
had been more than a powerful warrior superbly skilled at combat. He
had been an extraordinary leader. In the first few weeks after his
father’s shocking death, Anduin had done his best to comfort a
grieving, stunned populace reeling from the loss, while denying
himself a proper chance to mourn.
They grieved for the Wolf. Anduin grieved for the man.
And when he lay awake at night, unable to sleep, he would wonder
just how many demons in the end it had taken to murder King Varian
Wrynn.
Once he had voiced this thought to Genn Greymane, king of the
fallen realm of Gilneas, who had stepped in to counsel the fledgling
monarch. The old man had smiled even though sorrow haunted his
eyes.
“All I can tell you, my boy, is that before they got to your father, he
had single-handedly killed the largest fel reaver I ever saw, in order to
save an airship full of retreating soldiers. I know for certain that
Varian Wrynn made the Legion pay dearly for taking him.”
Anduin did not doubt that. It wasn’t enough, but it had to be.
Although there were plenty of armed guards in attendance, Anduin
had put on no armor on this day when the dead were remembered. He
was dressed in a white silk shirt, lambskin gloves, dark blue breeches,
and a heavy formal coat trimmed in gold. His only weapon was an
instrument of peace as much as war: the mace Fearbreaker, which he
wore at his side. When he had gifted the young prince with it, the
former dwarf king Magni Bronzebeard had said that Fearbreaker was a
weapon that had known the taste of blood in some hands and had
stanched blood in others.
Anduin wanted to meet and thank as many as he could among the
bereaved today. He wished he could console everyone, but the cold
truth was that such a thing was impossible. He took comfort in the
certainty that the Light shone upon them all…even a tired young king.
He lifted his face, knowing the sun was behind the clouds and letting
the gentle drops fall like a benediction. He recalled that it also had
rained a few years ago during a similar ceremony honoring those who
had made the final, greatest sacrifice in the campaign to halt the
mighty Lich King.
Two whom Anduin loved had been in attendance then who were not
here today. One, of course, was his father. The second was the woman
he had fondly called Aunt Jaina: Lady Jaina Proudmoore. Once, the
lady of Theramore and the prince of Stormwind had been in
agreement regarding the desire for peace between the Alliance and the
Horde.
And once there had been a Theramore.
But Jaina’s city had been destroyed by the Horde in the most
horrific manner possible, and its bereft lady had never been able to
ease the pain of that terrible moment fully. Anduin had watched her
try repeatedly, only to have some fresh torment reinjure her wounded
heart. Finally, unable to bear the thought of working alongside the
Horde even against so dread a foe as the demonic Legion, Jaina had
walked out on the Kirin Tor, which she led, on the blue dragon
Kalecgos, whom she loved, and on Anduin, whom she had inspired his
whole life.
“May I?” The voice was warm and kind, as was the woman who
asked the question.
Anduin smiled down at High Priestess Laurena. She was asking if he
wished her blessing. He nodded and inclined his head and felt the
tightness in his chest ease and his soul settle. He then stood
respectfully to the side while she spoke to the crowd, awaiting his own
turn.
He had not been able to speak formally at his father’s memorial
service. The grief had been too raw, too overwhelming. It had shifted
shape in his heart over time, becoming less immediate but no less
great, and so he had agreed to say a few words today.
Anduin stepped beside his father’s tomb. It was empty; what the
Legion had done to Varian had ensured that his body could not be
recovered. Anduin regarded the stone face on the tomb. It was a good
likeness and a comfort to look upon. But even the skilled stonecrafters
could not capture Varian’s fire, his quick temper, his easy laugh, his
motion. In a way, Anduin was glad the tomb was empty; he would
always, in his heart, see his father as alive and vibrant.
His mind went back to when he first had ventured to the place
where his father had fallen. Where Shalamayne, gifted to Varian by the
lady Jaina, had lain, dormant without Varian’s touch. Awaiting the
touch of another to which it would respond.
The touch of the great warrior’s son.
As he held it, he had almost felt Varian’s presence. It was then, when
Anduin truly accepted the duties of a king, that light had again begun
to swirl in the sword—not the orange-red hue of the warrior but the
warm, golden glow of the priest. At that moment, Anduin had begun to
heal.
Genn Greymane would be the last person to call himself eloquent,
but Anduin would never forget the words the older man had said: Your
father’s actions were indeed heroic. They were his challenge to us, his
people, to never let fear prevail…even at the very gates of hell.
Genn wisely had not said they were never to fear. They were only not
to let it win.
I will not, Father. And Shalamayne knows that.
Anduin forced himself to return to the present. He nodded to
Laurena, then turned to look at the crowd. The rain was slowing but
hadn’t stopped, yet no one seemed inclined to leave. Anduin’s gaze
swept over the widows and widowers, the childless parents, the
orphans, and the veterans. He was proud of the soldiers who had died
on the battlefield. He hoped their spirits would rest easily, knowing
their loved ones were heroes, too.
Because there was no one assembled at Lion’s Rest today who had
let fear prevail.
He spotted Greymane, hanging back beside a lamppost. Their eyes
met, and the older man nodded a brief acknowledgment. Anduin
allowed his gaze to roam over the faces, those he knew and those he
did not. A little pandaren girl was struggling not to cry; he gave her a
reassuring smile. She gulped and smiled back shakily.
“Like many of you, I know firsthand the pain of loss,” he said. His
voice rang clear and strong, carrying to those who stood in the farthest
rows. “You all know that my fath—”
He paused, clearing his throat, and continued. “King Varian
Wrynn…fell during the first major battle at the Broken Isles, when the
Legion invaded Azeroth yet again. He died to save his soldiers—the
brave men and women who faced unspeakable horrors to protect us,
our lands, our world. He knew that no one—not even a king—is more
important than the Alliance. Each of you has lost your own king or
queen. Your father or mother, brother or sister, son or daughter.
“And because he and so many others had the courage to make that
sacrifice, we did the impossible.” Anduin looked from face to face, saw
how hungry they were for comfort. “We defeated the Burning Legion.
And now we honor those who sacrificed all. We honor them not by
dying…but by living. By healing our wounds and helping others heal.
By laughing and feeling the sun on our faces. By holding our loved
ones close and letting them know every hour, every minute of every
day, that they matter.”
The rain had stopped. The clouds began to clear, and bits of bright
blue peeked through.
“Neither we nor our world escaped unscathed,” Anduin continued.
“We are scarred. A defeated titan has pierced our beloved Azeroth with
a terrible sword crafted from hatred made manifest, and we do not yet
know what toll it will take. Places in our hearts will forever remain
empty. But if you would serve one king who grieves with you today, if
you would honor the memory of another king who died for you, then I
urge you—live. For our lives, our joy, our world, these are the gifts of
the fallen. And we must cherish them. For the Alliance!”
The crowd cheered, some through their tears. Now it was others’
turn to speak. Anduin stepped to the side, allowing them to come up
and address the crowd. As he did so, his gaze flitted back to Greymane,
and his heart sank.
Mathias Shaw, master of spies and head of Stormwind’s intelligence
service, SI:7, stood beside the deposed king of Gilneas. And both men
looked as grim as Anduin had ever seen them.
He was not overly fond of Shaw, though the spymaster had served
Varian and now Anduin loyally and well. The king was intelligent
enough to understand and value the service SI:7 agents performed for
their kingdom. Indeed, he would never know exactly how many agents
had lost their lives in this recent war. Unlike warriors, those who
operated in the shadows lived, served, and died with few ever knowing
of their deeds. No, it wasn’t the spymaster himself Anduin disliked. It
was the need for men and women like him that he regretted.
Laurena had followed his gaze and stepped in without a word as
Anduin nodded to Genn and Shaw, moving his head to indicate that
they should speak away from the throngs of mourners who would not
depart for some time. Some lingered, kneeling in prayer. Some would
go home and continue to grieve in private. Others would go to taverns
to remind themselves that they were still among the living and could
yet enjoy food and drink and laughter. To celebrate life, as Anduin had
urged them.
But a king’s tasks were never done.
The three men walked quietly behind the memorial. The clouds were
almost gone, and the rays of the setting sun sparkled on the water of
the harbor that spread out below.
Anduin went to the carved stone wall and placed his hands on it,
breathing deeply of the sea air and listening to the cry of the gulls.
Taking a moment to steady himself before hearing whatever dark
words Shaw had to utter.
As soon as word of the great sword in Silithus had reached him,
Anduin had ordered Shaw to investigate and report. He needed boots
on the ground there, not the wild rumors that had been circulating. It
sounded impossible, and terrifying, and the worst part of it was that it
was all true. The final act of a corrupted being, the very last and most
devastating blow struck in the war against the Legion, had all but
obliterated much of Silithus. The only thing that had mitigated the
scope of the disaster had been that mercifully, in his random, angry
blow, Sargeras had not thrust the sword into a more populated part of
the world than the nearly empty desert land. Had he struck here, in
the Eastern Kingdoms, a continent away from Silithus…Anduin could
not permit himself to go down that path. He would be grateful for
what little he could be.
Shaw had hitherto sent missives with information. Anduin had not
expected the man himself to return quite so soon.
“Tell me,” was all the king said.
“Goblins, sir. A whole mess of the unsavory creatures. It seems they
began arriving within a day of—”
He broke off. No one had come up with a vocabulary to describe the
sword that felt comfortable. “Of the sword-strike,” Mathias continued.
“That fast?” Anduin was startled. He kept his expression neutral as
he continued to gaze out over the water. The ships and their crews
look so small from here, he thought. Like toys. So breakable.
“That fast,” Shaw confirmed.
“Goblins aren’t the most charming, but they are cunning. And they
do things for a reason,” Anduin said.
“And those reasons usually involve money.”
Only one group could gather and finance so many goblins so
quickly: the Bilgewater Cartel, which had the support of the Horde.
This had the oily fingerprints of the unctuous and morally deficient
Jastor Gallywix all over it.
Anduin pressed his lips together for a moment before speaking. “So.
The Horde has found something valuable in Silithus. What is it this
time? Another ancient city to scavenge?”
“No, Your Majesty. They found…this.”
The king turned around. In Shaw’s palm was a dirty white
handkerchief. Wordlessly, he unfolded it.
In the center was a small pebble of some golden substance. It looked
like honey and ice, warm and inviting, yet also cool and comforting.
And…it was glowing. Anduin eyed it skeptically. It was appealing, yes,
but no more so than other gems. It didn’t look like anything to warrant
a huge influx of goblins.
Anduin was confused, and he glanced over at Genn, an eyebrow
raised in query. He knew little of spycraft, and Shaw, though well
regarded by all, was still largely an enigma that Anduin was only
beginning to decipher.
Genn nodded, acknowledging that Shaw’s gesture was odd and the
object odder but indicating that however Shaw wished to proceed,
Anduin could trust him. The king removed his glove and held out his
hand.
The stone tumbled gently into Anduin’s palm.
And he gasped.
The heaviness of grief vanished as if it were physical armor that had
been seized and yanked off. Weariness fled, replaced by surging,
almost crackling energy and insight. Strategies raced through his head,
each one of them sound and successful, each one of them engendering
a shift in comprehension and ensuring a lasting peace that benefited
every being on Azeroth.
Not only his mind but also his body seemed to ascend abruptly and
shockingly, rocketing in an instant to whole new levels of strength,
dexterity, and control. Anduin felt like he could not only climb
mountains…he could move them. He could end war, channel the Light
into every dark corner. He was exultant and also perfectly, wholly calm
and completely certain as to how to channel this rushing river—no,
tsunami—of energy and power. Not even the Light affected him as
this…this did. The sensation was similar but less spiritual, more
physical.
More alarming.
For a long moment, Anduin couldn’t speak, could only stare in
wonder at the infinitely precious thing he cupped in his palm. At last
he found his voice.
“What…what is this?” he managed.
“We don’t know.” Shaw’s voice was blunt.
What could be done with this! Anduin thought. How many could it
heal? How many could it strengthen, soothe, invigorate, inspire?
How many could it kill?
The thought was a gut punch, and he felt the elation inspired by the
gemstone retreat.
When he spoke again, Anduin’s voice was strong and determined.
“It would seem the Horde does know…and we must find out more.”
This could not be allowed to fall into the wrong hands.
Into Sylvanas’s hands…
So much power…
He closed his fingers carefully around the small nugget of limitless
possibility and turned again to the west.
“Agreed,” Shaw replied. “We have eyes on it.”
They stood for a moment while Anduin considered his next words.
He knew that both Shaw and Greymane—the latter
uncharacteristically silent but looking on approvingly—were awaiting
his orders, and he was grateful to have such staunch individuals in his
service. A lesser man than Shaw would have pocketed this sample.
“Get your best people on it, Shaw. Pull them off other assignments if
need be. We must learn more about this. I’ll be calling a meeting of my
advisers shortly.” Anduin extended his hand for Shaw’s handkerchief
and carefully rewrapped the small chunk of this unknown,
unbelievable material. He tucked it into a pocket. The sensation was
less intense, but he still could feel it.
Anduin already had intended to travel, to visit the lands of
Stormwind’s allies. To thank them and help them recover from the
ravages of war.
His schedule had just been accelerated drastically.
S
ylvanas Windrunner, former ranger-general of Silvermoon, the
Dark Lady of the Forsaken, and present warchief of the mighty
Horde, had resented being told to come to Orgrimmar like a dog that
needed to perform all its tricks. She had wanted to return to the
Undercity. She missed its shadows, its dampness, its restful quietude.
Rest in peace, she thought grimly, and felt the tug of an amused smile.
It faded almost at once as she continued pacing impatiently in the
small chamber behind the warchief’s throne in Grommash Hold.
She paused, her sharp ears picking up the sound of familiar
footsteps. The tanned hide that served as a nod to privacy was drawn
aside, and the newcomer entered.
“You are late. Another quarter of an hour and I would have been
forced to ride without my champion beside me.”
He bowed. “Forgive me, my queen. I have been about your business,
and it took longer than expected.”
She was unarmed, but he carried a bow and bore a quiver full of
arrows. The only human ever to become a ranger, he was a superlative
marksman. It was one reason he was the best bodyguard Sylvanas
could possibly have. There were other reasons, too, reasons that had
their roots in the distant past, when the two had connected under a
bright and beautiful sun and had fought for bright and beautiful
things.
Death had claimed them both, human and elf alike. Little now was
bright and beautiful, and much of the past they had shared had grown
dim and hazy.
But not all of it.
Although Sylvanas had left behind most warmer emotions the
moment she had risen from the dead as a banshee, anger somehow
had retained its heat. But she felt it subside to embers now. She
seldom stayed angry for long at Nathanos Marris, known now as
Blightcaller. And he had indeed been about her business, visiting the
Undercity, while she had been saddled with duties that had kept her
here in Orgrimmar.
She wanted to reach for his hand but contented herself with smiling
benevolently at him. “You are forgiven,” she said. “Now. Tell me of our
home.”
Sylvanas expected a brief recitation of modest concerns, a
reaffirmation of the Forsaken’s loyalty to their Dark Lady. Instead,
Nathanos frowned. “The situation…is complicated, my queen.”
Her smile faded. What could possibly be “complicated” about it?
The Undercity belonged to the Forsaken, and they were her people.
“Your presence has been sorely missed,” he said. “While many are
proud that at last the Horde has a Forsaken as its warchief, there are
some who feel that you have perchance forgotten those who have been
more loyal to you than any other.”
She laughed sharply and without humor. “Baine and Saurfang and
the others say I have not been giving them enough attention. My
people say I have been giving them too much. Whatever I do, someone
objects. How can anyone rule like this?” She shook her pale head. “A
curse upon Vol’jin and his loa. I should have stayed in the shadows,
where I could be effective without being interrogated.”
Where I could do as I truly wished.
She’d never wanted this. Not really. As she had told the troll Vol’jin
before, during the trial of the late and greatly unlamented Garrosh
Hellscream, she liked her power, her control, on the subtle side. But
with quite literally his dying breath, Vol’jin, the Horde’s leader, had
commanded that she do the opposite. He had claimed he had been
granted a vision by the loa he honored.
You must step out of da shadows and lead.
You must be warchief.
Vol’jin had been someone she respected, although they had clashed
on occasion. He lacked the abrasiveness that so often characterized orc
leadership. And she had been genuinely sorry he had fallen—and not
just because of the responsibility he had placed on her head.
She had opened her mouth to ask Nathanos to continue when she
heard the thump-thump of a spear butt on the stone floor outside the
small room. Sylvanas closed her eyes, trying to gather patience.
“Enter,” she growled.
One of the Kor’kron, the elite orc guards of the hold, obeyed and
stood at attention, his green face unreadable. “Warchief,” he said, “it is
time. Your people await you.”
Your people. No. Her people were back in the Undercity, missing
her and feeling slighted, unaware that she would like nothing more
than to return and be among them once more.
“I will be out momentarily,” Sylvanas said, adding, in case the guard
did not understand what was behind the words, “Leave us.”
The orc saluted and withdrew, letting the skin flap fall into place.
“We will continue this as we ride,” she told Nathanos. “And I have
other things I wish to discuss with you as well.”
“As my queen wishes,” Nathanos replied.
—
A few years earlier, Garrosh Hellscream had pushed to have a massive
celebration in Orgrimmar to commemorate the end of the Northrend
campaign. He wasn’t warchief—not then. There had been a parade of
every veteran who wished to participate, their path strewn with
imported pine boughs, and a gigantic feast awaited them at the end of
the route.
It had been extravagant, and expensive, and Sylvanas had no
intention of following in the footsteps of Hellscream, not just in this
situation but in any. He had been arrogant, brutal, impulsive. His
decision to attack Theramore with a devastating mana bomb had the
softer races wrestling with their consciences, although the only thing
that had truly troubled Sylvanas about it was the orc’s timing. Sylvanas
had loathed him and had secretly conspired—regrettably without
success—to kill him even after he had been arrested and charged with
war crimes. When, inevitably, Garrosh had been killed, Sylvanas had
been immensely pleased.
Varok Saurfang, the leader of the orcs, and Baine Bloodhoof, high
chieftain of the tauren, had borne no love for Garrosh either. But they
had pushed Sylvanas to make a public appearance in Orgrimmar and
at least some kind of gesture to mark the end of the war. Brave
members of this Horde you lead fought and died to make sure the
Legion did not destroy this world, as the demons have so many
others, the young bull had intoned. He had been but one step away
from openly rebuking her.
Sylvanas recalled Saurfang’s thinly veiled…warning? Threat? You
are the leader of all the Horde—orcs, tauren, trolls, blood elves,
pandaren, goblins—as well as the Forsaken. You must never forget
that, or else they might.
What I will not forget, orc, she thought, ire rising in her anew, are
those words.
So now, instead of returning home and addressing the Forsaken’s
concerns, Sylvanas sat astride one of her bony skeletal horses, waving
to the throngs of celebrants who crowded the streets of Orgrimmar.
The march—she had taken care that no one referred to it as a
“parade”—officially began at the entrance to the Horde capital. On one
side of the gargantuan gates were clusters of the blood elves and
Forsaken who inhabited the city.
The blood elves were all dressed splendidly in their predictable
colors of red and gold. At their head was Lor’themar Theron. He rode a
red-plumed hawkstrider and met her gaze evenly.
Friends, they had been. Theron had served under a living Sylvanas
when she was ranger-general of the high elves. They had been
comrades in arms, much like the one who rode beside her as her
champion. But whereas Nathanos, a mortal human in years past and
now Forsaken, had kept his unswerving loyalty to her, Sylvanas knew
that Theron’s was to his people.
People who had been just like her once.
They were just like her no more.
Theron inclined his head. He would serve, at least for the moment.
Not one for speeches, Sylvanas merely nodded back and turned to the
group of Forsaken.
They stood patiently, as always, and she was proud of them for that.
But she could not show favoritism, not here. So she gave them the
same greeting she had given Lor’themar and the sin’dorei, then
nudged her steed to move through the gate. The blood elves and the
Forsaken fell in line, riding behind so as not to crowd her. That had
been her stipulation, and she had stood firm on it. She wanted to be
able to snatch at least a few moments of privacy. There were things
meant for her champion’s ears alone.
“Tell me more about the thoughts of my people,” she ordered.
“From their perspective,” the dark ranger resumed, “you were a
fixture in the Undercity. You made them, you worked to prolong their
existence, you were everything to them. Your ascension to warchief
was so sudden, the threat so great and so immediate, that you left no
one behind to care for them.”
Sylvanas nodded. She supposed she could understand that.
“You left a great hole. And holes in power tend to be filled.”
Her red eyes widened. Was he speaking of a coup? The queen’s
mind flashed back a few years to the betrayal of Varimathras, a demon
she had thought would obey her. He had joined with the ungrateful
wretch Putress, a Forsaken apothecary who had created a plague
against both the living and the undead and who had nearly killed
Sylvanas herself. Retaking the Undercity had been a bloody endeavor.
But no. Even as the thought occurred to her, she knew that her loyal
champion would not be speaking in so casual a manner if something
so terrible had happened.
Reading her expression perfectly, as he so often did, Nathanos
hastened to reassure her. “All is calm there, my queen. But in the
absence of a single powerful leader, the inhabitants of your city have
formed a governing body to tend to the population’s needs.”
“Ah, I see. An interim organization. That is…not unreasonable.”
The warchief’s path through the city would take her first through an
alley lined with shops called the Drag and then to the Valley of Honor.
The Drag had once been an apt name for the area, which had abutted a
canyon wall in a less than savory part of the city before the Cataclysm.
With that terrible event, the Drag, like so much of beleaguered
Azeroth, had physically shifted. Like Sylvanas Windrunner herself, it
had emerged from the shadows. Sunlight now illuminated the
winding, hard-packed dirt of the streets. More reputable
establishments, such as clothing shops and ink supply stores, seemed
to be springing up as well.
“They are calling themselves the Desolate Council,” Nathanos
continued.
“A rather self-pitying name,” Sylvanas murmured.
“Perhaps,” Nathanos agreed. “But it is a clear indicator of their
feelings.” He glanced over at her as they rode. “My queen, there are
rumors about things that you have done in this war. Some of those
rumors are even true.”
“What kind of rumors?” she asked, perhaps too quickly. Sylvanas
had plans upon plans, and wondered which of them had seeped into
the realm of rumor among her people.
“Word has reached them of some of your more extreme efforts to
continue their existence,” Nathanos said.
Ah. That. “I assume that word has also reached them that Genn
Greymane destroyed their hope,” Sylvanas replied bitterly.
She had taken her flagship, the Windrunner, to Stormheim in the
Broken Isles in search of more Val’kyr to resurrect the fallen. It was,
thus far, the only way Sylvanas had found to create more Forsaken.
“I was almost able to enslave the great Eyir. She would have given
me the Val’kyr for all eternity. None of my people would have ever died
again.” She paused. “I would have saved them.”
“That…is the concern.”
“Do not dance around this, Nathanos. Speak plainly.”
“Not all of them desire for themselves what you desire for them, my
queen. Many on the Desolate Council harbor deep reservations.” His
face, still that of a dead man but better preserved because of an
elaborate ritual she had ordered performed, twisted in a smile. “This is
the peril you created when you gave them free will. They are now free
to disagree.”
Her pale brows drew together in a terrible frown. “Do they want
extinction, then?” she hissed, anger flaring brightly inside her. “Do
they want to be rotting in the earth?”
“I do not know what they want,” Nathanos replied calmly. “They
wish to speak with you, not with me.”
Sylvanas growled softly under her breath. Nathanos, ever patient,
waited. He would obey her in all things, she knew. She could, right
now, order a group of any combination of non-Forsaken Horde
warriors to march on the Undercity and seize the members of this
ungrateful council. But even as she had that satisfying thought, she
knew it would be unwise. She needed to know more—much more—
before she could act. She would prefer to dissuade Forsaken—any
Forsaken—than destroy them.
“I…will consider their request. But for now I have something else I
wish to discuss. We need to increase what is in the Horde’s coffers,”
Sylvanas murmured quietly to her champion. “We will need the funds,
and we will need them.”
She waved at a family of orcs. Both the male and the female bore
battle scars, but they were smiling, and the child they lifted over their
heads to see her warchief was plump and healthy-looking. Clearly,
some of the Horde loved their warchief.
“I’m not sure I understand, my queen,” Nathanos said. “Of course,
the Horde needs funds and its members.”
“It is not the members that concern me. It is the army. I have
decided I will not dissolve it.”
He turned to look at her. “They think they’ve come home,” he said.
“Is this not the case?”
“It is, for the moment,” she said. “Injuries need time to heal. Crops
need to be planted. But soon I will call upon the brave fighters of the
Horde for another battle. The one you and I have both longed for.”
Nathanos was silent. She did not take that for disagreement or
disapproval. He was often silent. That he did not press her for more
details meant that he understood what she wanted.
Stormwind.
T
he peace-hungry boy-king Anduin Wrynn had lost his father and
by all accounts had taken it badly. There were rumors that he had
recovered Shalamayne and was now fighting with cold steel as well as
with the Light. Sylvanas was dubious. She had difficulty imagining the
sensitive child doing such things. She had respected Varian. She had
even liked him. And the specter of the Legion had been so dreadful
that she had been willing to put aside the hatred that fueled her now as
food and drink had fueled her in life.
But the Wolf was gone, and the young lion was still a cub, really, and
the humans had taken tremendous losses. They were weak.
Vulnerable. Prey.
And Sylvanas was a hunter.
The Horde was tough. Strong. Battle-hardened. Its members would
recover far more swiftly than the Alliance races. They would need less
time for the things she had cited; crops, healing, a chance to pause and
restore themselves. Soon enough, they would thirst for blood, and she
would offer the red life-fluid of Stormwind’s humans, the oldest
enemies of the Horde, to slake that thirst.
And in the bargain she would increase the population of the
Forsaken. For all the humans who fell with their city would be reborn
to serve her. Would that be so terrible, really? They would be with
their loved ones for all time. They would not suffer the daggers of
passion or loss any longer. They would need no sleep. They could
pursue their interests in death as well as in life. There would at last be
unity.
If the humans only understood how terribly life and all its attendant
suffering dealt with them, Sylvanas thought, they would leap at the
chance. The Forsaken understood…at least, she had thought they did,
until the Desolate Council had inexplicably concluded otherwise.
Baine Bloodhoof, Varok Saurfang, Lor’themar Theron, and Jastor
Gallywix would no doubt consider that Sylvanas had a certain interest
in creating human corpses. They had not become leaders of their
people by being stupid, after all. But they also would be fighting
against the hated humans and claiming their shining white city, with
its neighboring forested land and bountiful fields, for their own. They
would not begrudge her the bodies, not when she handed them such a
victory—one both practical and highly symbolic.
There was no longer a human hero to stand and rally the Alliance
against them. No Anduin Lothar, who was slain by Orgrim
Doomhammer, and no Llane or Varian Wrynn. The only one by those
names was Anduin Wrynn, and he was nothing.
Sylvanas, Nathanos, and her entourage of veterans had gone all the
way through the Valley of Honor and looped back, heading into the
Valley of Wisdom. There Baine awaited her. He stood in full
traditional tauren regalia, only his ears and tail moving as they flicked
off the flies that buzzed in the summer air. Many of his braves were
gathered around him. Mounted, Sylvanas was tall enough to look even
the males in the eye, and she did so steadily. Baine stared calmly back.
Except for those pandaren who had chosen to ally with the Horde,
Sylvanas had the least in common with the tauren. They were a deeply
spiritual people, calm and steady. They craved the tranquillity of
nature and honored ancient ways. Sylvanas once had understood those
sentiments but no longer could relate to any of them.
What irked her the most about Baine was that despite the murder of
his father and wrong upon wrong being heaped upon his horned head,
the young bull still cherished peace above all pursuits: peace between
races and in one’s own heart.
Baine’s honor obligated him to serve her, and he would not tarnish
it. Not unless he was pushed to limits that Sylvanas still hadn’t
reached.
He placed his hand on his broad chest, over his heart, and stamped
his hoof in a tauren version of a salute. The braves followed suit, and
the ground of Orgrimmar trembled ever so slightly. Then Sylvanas
continued, and the tauren fell in line behind the cluster of Forsaken
and Theron’s blood elves.
Still Nathanos remained silent. They followed the twining road
toward the Valley of Spirits, the long-standing seat of the trolls. They
were so proud of themselves, these “first” few races. Sylvanas believed
that they never truly accepted the later races—the blood elves, the
goblins, and her own people—as “true” Horde members. It amused her
that, since the goblins had joined the Horde, they had oozed into the
Valley of Spirits and had nearly ruined their allotted area.
Like the tauren, the trolls were among the first friends to the orcs.
The orc leader Thrall had named the land Durotar for his father,
Durotan. Orgrimmar was so named to honor an early warchief of the
Horde, Orgrim Doomhammer. In fact, until Vol’jin, all warchiefs had
been orcs. And until Sylvanas, they all had been members of the
original founding races. And male.
Sylvanas had changed all that, and she was proud of it.
Like her, Vol’jin had left his people leaderless upon his ascension to
warchief. The trolls stood today with no public face to represent them,
save potentially Rokhan; at least the Forsaken had her in the role of
warchief. Sylvanas reminded herself to appoint someone head of the
trolls as swiftly as possible. Someone she could work with. Could
control. The last thing she needed was for the trolls to choose someone
who might want to challenge her position.
Although many today had greeted her with cheers and smiles,
Sylvanas did not fool herself that she was universally beloved. She had
led the Horde to a seemingly impossible victory, and for now, at least,
it appeared that its members were solidly with her.
Good.
She nodded courteously to the trolls, then braced herself to meet the
next group.
Sylvanas did not much care for goblins. Although her own sense of
honor was somewhat fluid, she could appreciate honor in others. It
was, like many things, an echo of something she once had heard. But
the goblins were little better than squat, ugly money-grubbing
parasites as far as she was concerned. Oh, they were intelligent.
Sometimes dangerously so—to themselves and others. That they were
creative and inventive there was no doubt. But she preferred the days
when the only relationship one had with them was purely financial.
Now they were full-fledged members of the Horde, and she had to
pretend that they mattered.
They, of course, were not without their leader: the multi-chinned,
waistband-straining green lump of greed that was Trade Prince Jastor
Gallywix. He stood in the front of his motley gaggle of goblins, all of
them grinning and showing their sharp yellow teeth. His spindly legs
seemed already too tired to bear his frame, and he sported his favorite
top hat and cane. At her approach, he bowed as deeply as his
midsection would permit.
“Warchief,” he said in that unctuous voice, “I hope you might find
some time for me later. I have something that might interest you a
very great deal.”
No one else had dared try to insert their own agenda this day. Trust
a goblin to do so. She frowned at him and opened her mouth to speak.
Then she looked carefully at his expression.
Sylvanas had lived a very long life before Arthas Menethil had cut
her down. And now she lived, after a fashion, again. She had spent
much of that time looking into faces, judging the character behind
them and the words that were spoken.
Gallywix often had that sort of hail-fellow-well-met artificial cheer
that she so despised, but not today. There was no desperate push from
him. He was…calm. He looked like a player who knew he was going to
win. That he so boldly addressed her here, now, meant that he was
serious about speaking with her. But his body language—he wasn’t
hunching obsequiously but stood straight for perhaps the first time
she’d ever seen—told her even more clearly that this was someone
willing to walk away from the table without undue disappointment.
This time he meant it. He did have something that would interest
her a very great deal.
“Speak with me at the feast,” she said.
“As my warchief commands,” the goblin said, and doffed his top hat
to her.
Sylvanas turned away to complete the route.
“I do not trust that goblin.” Nathanos, who had remained so silent
for so long, spoke with distaste.
“Nor do I,” Sylvanas replied. “But one thing goblins understand is
profit. I can listen without promising anything.”
Nathanos nodded. “Of course, Warchief.”
The goblins and the trolls had fallen in line behind her. Gallywix was
riding in a litter behind Sylvanas’s own guards. How he had finagled
that position, she didn’t know. He met her gaze and grinned, giving
her a thumbs-up and a wink. Sylvanas fought to keep her lip from
curling in disgust. She already was regretting her decision to talk with
Gallywix later, so she focused on something else.
“We do still agree, do we not?” she said to Nathanos. “Stormwind
must fall, and the victims of the battle will become Forsaken.”
“All is as you would wish it, my queen,” he said, “but I do not think
mine is the opinion with which you need to concern yourself. Have you
broached this with the other leaders? They may have something to say
about the idea. I do not think we have seen a peace more dearly
bought, nor more appreciated. They may not want to upend the cart
just yet.”
“While our enemies remain, peace is not victory.” Not when
vulnerable prey yet remained to be hunted. And not when the
continued existence of her Forsaken was so uncertain.
“For the warchief!” a tauren bellowed, his oversized lungs enabling
the cry to carry far.
“Warchief! Warchief! Warchief!”
The long “victory march” was nearing its end. Now Sylvanas
approached Grommash Hold. Only one more leader awaited her—one
to whom she gave grudging respect.
Varok Saurfang was intelligent, strong, fierce, and, like Baine, loyal.
But there was something in the orc’s eyes that always put her on alert
when she gazed into them. The knowledge that if she misstepped too
badly, he might well challenge, or even outright oppose, her.
That look was in his eyes now as he stepped forward. He met
Sylvanas stare for stare, not breaking eye contact even as he executed a
brief bow and stepped aside to let her pass before he fell in line behind
her.
As all the others would do.
Warchief Sylvanas dismounted and entered Grommash Hold with
her head held high.
Nathanos was concerned that the other leaders wouldn’t support her
plan.
I will tell them what they will do…when the time is right.
—
A heavy, rough-hewn wooden table and benches had been brought
into Grommash Hold. A celebratory feast would be served for the
leaders of each group and a select few of their guards or companions.
Sylvanas herself would sit at the head of the table, as befitted her
position.
Now, as Sylvanas regarded her tablemates, she reflected that none
of them had family of any sort. Her champion was the closest thing to
a formal consort or even companion present. And their relationship
was complicated, even to themselves.
Each of the races had been encouraged to present a ritual
celebrating victory or honoring its veterans. Sylvanas was willing to
indulge this request; it would appease many, and the funds for such an
event would come not from Horde coffers but from those of each race.
The idea had been suggested by Baine, of course, whose people had
practiced such rituals as part of their culture for…well, as long as there
had been tauren, Sylvanas assumed.
The trolls, too, had agreed to participate, as well as the Horde’s
pandaren. They had a unique position among the Horde in that they
were a collection of individuals who felt a connection to the Horde’s
ideals. Their leader, and their land, was far away, but they had proven
their worth to the Horde. They had nodded their furry round heads at
the prospect of presenting a ritual, promising beauty and spectacle to
uplift the spirits. Sylvanas had smiled pleasantly and told them that
such would be welcomed.
Sylvanas recalled that once, Quel’Thalas used to host magnificent,
bright, shining ceremonies with mock battles and pomp and
pageantry. But in more recent times the former high elves, wrestling
with betrayal and addiction, had turned much grimmer. Quel’Thalas
was recovering, and the blood elves still loved their luxuries and
comforts, but they now found such ostentatious displays distasteful in
the light of so much unrelenting tragedy for their people. Their
contribution, Theron had told her, would be brief and to the point.
They were bitter now. Bitter as the Forsaken still were; Sylvanas had
flatly refused to participate in what she perceived as a waste of time
and gold.
In this, the goblins were on her side. It was a darkly amusing
thought.
She waited as several shaman of all races opened the ceremonies
with a ritual. The tauren offered a re-creation of one of the great
battles of the war. And finally, the pandaren stepped into the center of
Grommash Hold. They wore silk outfits—tunics and breeches and
dresses—in hues of jade green, sky blue, and nauseating pink. Sylvanas
had to admit, for as large and soft and round as the pandaren
appeared, they were startlingly graceful as they danced, tumbled, and
staged mock battles.
Baine rose to close the events. Slowly, his gaze roamed the hall,
taking in not just the leaders at the table but others who sat on rugs
and hides on the hard-packed dirt floor.
“It is with both pain and pride that we gather here today,” he
rumbled. “Pain, for many brave heroes of the Horde fell in honorable
and terrible battle. Vol’jin, warchief of the Horde, led the vanguard
against the Legion. He fought with courage. He fought for the Horde.”
“For the Horde,” came the solemn murmur. Baine turned to look at
something. Sylvanas followed his gaze and saw Vol’jin’s weapons and
ritual mask hanging in a place of honor. Others, too, bowed their
heads. Sylvanas inclined her own.
“But we do not forget the pride we hold in those battles—and their
outcome. For against all odds, we have vanquished the Legion. Our
victory was bought with blood, but it was bought. We bled. Now we
heal. We mourned. Now we celebrate! For the Horde!”
The response was no hushed, respectful one this time but a fullthroated, openhearted cheer that all but shook the rafters of the hold.
“For the Horde!”
Roasted boar and root vegetables were served, with ale, wine, or
harder liquor to wash it down. Sylvanas observed while others
partook. Shortly after the first course was cleared, she noticed a red
and purple top hat splotched with stars heading toward her end of the
table.
“Oh, Warchief? A moment of your time.”
“One moment,” Sylvanas told the grinning goblin. He halted beside
her chair. “You have my attention. Do not waste it.”
“I’m certain you’ll agree that I’m not, Warchief,” he said again with
that air of complete confidence. “But first a little background. I’m sure
you’re aware of the tragedies and challenges the Bilgewater Cartel
faced before we were invited to join the Horde.”
“Yes. Your island was destroyed by an erupting volcano,” Sylvanas
said.
Gallywix looked unconvincingly sad. He touched a gloved finger to
his eye to wipe away a nonexistent tear. “So many lost,” he sighed. “So
much kaja’mite gone, just like that.”
Sylvanas amended her thought. Perhaps the tears were genuine.
“Kaja’Cola.” The goblin sniffled nostalgically. “ ‘It gives you ideas.’ ”
“Yes, I am aware there is no more kaja’mite,” Sylvanas said flatly.
“Get to the point, assuming you have one.” Her conversation with the
goblin was drawing undue attention from Baine and Saurfang, among
others.
“Oh, yes indeedy, I most certainly do. You know,” he said, laughing a
little, “it’s kind of funny. There’s a distinct possibility that that
volcano…might not have been caused by Deathwing or the Cataclysm.”
Her glowing eyes widened slightly. Was he really saying what she
thought he was? She waited with an impatience that was not usually
associated with the dead.
“You see, hmm…how to put this?” He drummed his fingers against
his first chin. “We were mining rather deeply on Kezan. We had to
keep our customers happy, now, didn’t we? Kaja’Cola being the
delicious, brain-boosting beverage that—”
“Do not push me, goblin.”
“Gotcha. So. Back to my tale. We were digging deep. Very deep. And
we found something unexpected. A hitherto unknown substance.
Something truly phenomenal. Unique! Only a small vein of liquid that
turned solid and changed color once exposed to the air. One of my
smarter miners, ah…recovered a chunk of it privately and brought it to
me as a token of his esteem.”
“In other words, he stole it and tried to bribe you with it.”
“That’s one way of looking at it. But that’s not the point. The point is
that while that awful Deathwing certainly had a lot to do with
triggering the volcano, digging that deep may—may, I repeat, I’m not
at all certain of it—have contributed.”
Sylvanas regarded the trade prince with newfound awe at the depths
of his avarice and selfishness. If Gallywix was right, he’d cheerfully
destroyed his own island and a goodly number of innocent—well,
comparatively innocent—goblins along with it. All for a piece of some
kind of marvelous ore.
“I did not know you had it in you,” she said almost in a tone of
admiration.
He seemed about to thank her, then thought better of it. “Well. It
was a very special mineral, I must say.”
“And I imagine you keep it locked away in a very secure location.”
Gallywix opened his mouth, then slitted his eyes and looked
mistrustfully at Nathanos. Sylvanas almost laughed. “My champion
Nathanos is a dour sort. He barely speaks, even to me. Any secrets you
have to share with me are more than safe with him.”
“As my warchief says,” Gallywix replied slowly, clearly unconvinced
but seeing no other option. “You are incorrect, Dark Lady. I do not
keep it hidden away. I keep it in plain sight, literally close at hand.”
He used the golden-hued tip of his cane to push back his hideous
top hat in a casual gesture. Sylvanas waited for an answer. When a
moment passed and she received none, she started to frown. The
goblin’s tiny eyes moved, flickering to the top of his cane and then
back to Sylvanas.
The cane? She looked at it again, more closely this time. She’d never
paid it much attention. She never paid much attention to anything
Gallywix wore, carried, or said. But something was nagging at her.
Then she knew what it was. “It used to be red.”
“It used to be,” he agreed. “It isn’t now.”
Sylvanas realized that the small orb, only about the size of an apple,
was not actually made of gold. It was made of something that looked
like…like…
Amber. Tree sap that over the centuries had hardened to become
something that could be crafted into jewelry. Sometimes ancient
insects had gotten caught in the flowing fluid, forever enveloped by it.
This one had that same warmth to it. It was pretty. But she was
skeptical that this harmless-looking decoration was as all-powerful as
Gallywix would have her believe.
“Let me see it,” she demanded.
“I will happily do so, but not in front of prying eyes. Can we go
someplace a little less public?” At her irritated glance, he said in the
sincerest voice she had ever heard from him, “Look. You are gonna
want to keep this information close. Trust me on this.”
Oddly, she did. “If you are exaggerating, you will suffer.”
“Oh, I know that. And I also know you’re going to like what you find
out.”
Sylvanas leaned over and murmured to Nathanos. “I will be back
momentarily. He had best be right.”
Aware of the eyes on her, she rose and indicated that Gallywix might
follow her back to the room behind the throne. He did so, and as the
skin flap dropped closed, he said, “Huh. I never knew this place was
here.”
Sylvanas did not reply, instead simply extending her hand for the
cane. With a little bow, he handed it to her. Her hand closed around it.
Nothing.
The decoration was garish, but Sylvanas could see now that it was of
fine craftsmanship. She was rapidly tiring of the goblin’s game. She
frowned slightly and slipped one hand up the cane’s shaft to the gem
that was perched atop it.
Her eyes flew wide, and she sucked in a soft gasp of astonishment.
Once she had mourned the life denied to her. She had contented
herself with the gifts of her undeath: her devastating banshee wail, the
freedom from hunger and exhaustion, and the other shackles that
tethered mortals. But this sensation dwarfed them both.
She felt not merely strong but mighty. As if her grip could crush a
skull, as if a single stride could cover a league and more. Energy coiled
inside each muscle, straining like a beast of pure precision and power
against a leash. Thoughts raced through her brain, not simply her
usual calculating, cunning, clever thoughts but shining, frighteningly
brilliant ones. Innovative. Creative.
She was no longer a dark lady or even a queen. She was a goddess of
destruction and creation, and she was stunned that she had never
understood how deeply the two were intertwined. Armies, cities, entire
cultures—she could raise them.
And fell them. Stormwind would be among the first, yielding its
people to swell the numbers of her own.
She could deal death on a scale that—
Sylvanas released the orb as if it had burned her.
“This…will change everything.” Her voice was shaking. She
summoned her usual icy calm. “Why have you not used this ere now?”
“It was gold when it was liquid, see, and it was amazing. Then it
became solid and red, and it was pretty but ordinary. I always held out
hope I’d find more of the stuff one day. And then…one day, boom, the
top of the cane turned gold and amazing again. Who knew?”
Sylvanas needed to get back to the feast. The other leaders doubtless
were talking already. She didn’t intend to give them more fodder by
lingering here.
“You see the possibilities,” the goblin said as they reentered the
hold. As if he were talking about something mundane and pragmatic,
not something that had shaken Sylvanas Windrunner to her very core
with a taste of power hitherto unimaginable.
“I do,” she said, her voice under control again, though inside she still
trembled. “Once this feast is finished, you and I will talk at length. This
will serve the Horde well.”
Only the Horde.
“The Alliance knows nothing of this?”
“Don’t worry, Warchief,” he said, his old glib self again. “I got people
on it.”
A
nduin summoned his counselors to join him in Stormwind Keep’s
map room. They inclined their heads as he entered; he had long
ago bidden them not to bow.
Greymane and Shaw were there, of course. So was Prophet Velen,
the ancient draenei who had tutored Anduin in the ways of the Light.
Of all of them, it could be said that perhaps the draenei Prophet had
lost the most in this war. Genn had lost his son to violence in years
past, and of course this war had claimed Varian Wrynn. But Velen had
witnessed the death not only of his son but of his entire world—quite
literally.
And yet, Anduin mused as he regarded the lavender-skinned being,
though I can sense his sorrow, he remains the most serene of us all.
Sky Admiral Catherine Rogers was also present. Anduin had similar
sentiments toward her as he did toward Spymaster Shaw. Anduin
respected both individuals, but his relationship with them wasn’t
comfortable. Rogers was too thirsty for Horde blood for his liking. He
had forcefully rebuked both her and Greymane for taking a recent
assignment much further than he had ordered. But the Alliance had
needed Rogers’s hawkishness in the war, and Mathias protected the
innocent in his own way.
“It has been a difficult day,” Anduin said. “But it was more difficult
for those we addressed. In the end, the war is over, the Legion is
defeated, and we can bury the dead knowing that tomorrow will not
contribute to the numbers of those slain in battle. And for this I am
grateful.
“However, it does not mean that we can cease our efforts toward
making this world better. Instead of slaying our enemies, we must heal
and restore our people—and a world that is dreadfully wounded. And,”
Anduin added, “we must protect and study a precious resource that
has come to my attention just today. All these things pose a fresh set of
challenges.”
Anduin could sense the small golden-blue stone in his pocket,
nestled there quietly and benevolently. He knew very little about it yet,
but one thing he did know: it was not evil, though he understood full
well that it certainly could be turned to dark purposes. Even the naaru
could.
Anduin withdrew the handkerchief. “This morning, Spymaster Shaw
reported to me about what he has observed in Silithus. Not only are
there great fissures that have erupted, spreading out from where the
sword of Sargeras impaled the world, but those fissures have revealed
a hitherto unknown substance. It’s…unique. It’s easier to show you
how rather than tell you.”
He handed the handkerchief to Velen, who reacted as Anduin had.
The draenei took in a startled breath. Almost before Anduin’s eyes,
years—decades—of suffering seemed to be lifted. As profound as it had
been to experience it himself, it was almost more moving for Anduin to
witness the material’s effect on another.
“For a moment, I thought it a piece of a naaru,” Velen breathed. “It
is not, but the sensation is…similar.”
The naaru were benevolent beings made of holy energy. Nothing
was closer to the Light than they. When Anduin had studied under the
draenei at the Exodar, he had spent much time in the presence of the
naaru O’ros. The beautiful, benevolent being had been another
casualty of the war, and the memory of that time was now tinged with
pain. Even so, Anduin recalled the emotions O’ros had engendered,
and he agreed with Velen’s assessment.
“Although,” Velen added, “there is the potential for great harm here,
as well as great good.”
Greymane took it next. He seemed stunned by what he experienced,
almost confused by it, as if some deep, firmly held belief had been
shattered. Then he frowned, the lines around his eyes deepening, and
he thrust the honey-hued stone toward Shaw.
“I admit,” he said in a rough voice, directing his words to both the
king and the spymaster, “I thought perhaps you were exaggerating.
You weren’t. This stuff is powerful—and dangerous.”
Shaw waved the stone away; he seemed to have no desire to handle
it more than was necessary. Anduin respected that. Rogers took it
next. She stumbled, reaching out to grasp the side of the large map
table for balance, gazing raptly at the tiny piece of stone. Then her
expression turned to one of anger and hope commingled. “Is there
more of this?”
Shaw gave Velen and Rogers an edited version of what he’d told
Genn and Anduin earlier. The two listened intently. When he had
finished, Rogers said, “If we can find a way to use this…we could crush
the Horde.”
“The thought of Sylvanas with this sickens me,” Genn said, not
mincing words.
Why must we bend everything to violence? Anduin thought with his
own hint of anger. Instead he said, answering Rogers’s first question,
“I told Spymaster Shaw we must obtain more of this and study it. I
believe there are far better things we can do with this substance than
create methods to kill more efficiently.”
“Sylvanas wouldn’t think so, and neither must we.”
Anduin leveled his blue-eyed gaze at Greymane. “I would say that
what makes us better than her is that we do think so.” As Genn started
to protest, Anduin lifted a hand. “But I would never leave the Alliance
vulnerable. With enough information, we can apply our skills to more
than one task.” He squared his shoulders and turned his attention to
the map of Azeroth spread before him, his blue eyes roaming the
image of a world that had become newly precious to him. His gaze
lingered on the home of Stormwind’s nearest ally, the dwarven lands
and their capital city of Ironforge.
“Humans did not stand alone against the Legion,” Anduin reminded
those assembled. “We were joined in that fight by the draenei and
those pandaren who had chosen the Alliance. Your people, too, Genn:
worgen and human refugees who have more than earned their place in
the Alliance by standing shoulder to shoulder first with my father and
then with me to face that awful peril. The dwarves and the gnomes
also stood with us.”
“If not quite shoulder to shoulder,” Genn said. Anduin had
discovered that the softer emotions tended to make the gruff king
uncomfortable. Genn wore rage and stubbornness better than warmth
or gratitude. So, too, had Varian for many years.
“Perhaps not,” Anduin said, smiling a little; the joke was one at
which the dwarves themselves probably would guffaw. He envisioned
their former king, Magni Bronzebeard, retorting with something like
Nae worries, lad, we’ll cut ye down tae size.
“But they have always been there for us, as sturdy and undefeatable
as stone.” Affection for these strong, hardheaded people, who had
been the ones to start him along both his path to the priesthood as well
as toward proper fighting technique, swept through Anduin. “We
should take this to the Explorers’ League. They might have some
insight that we lack. And they are all over the world. That’s a lot of
extra eyes and ears for you, Shaw.”
Shaw nodded his reddish-brown head. Anduin continued.
“The night elves might also be of assistance. As ancient as their race
is, perhaps they have encountered something like this before. They,
too, lost many in this war, and I believe a pledge of aid and support
would be welcome. And the draenei—” Anduin reached to touch the
arm of his old friend Velen. “You have lost more than any of us can
fully comprehend. And as you say, this…material…evokes the naaru.
Perhaps there is some kind of connection.”
He returned his attention to the group. “All came when we called.
And now their veterans have returned to fields too long neglected, to
supplies dangerously depleted. We remember what happened after the
battle for Northrend. When resources are depleted, sparks of
resentment can turn to a conflagration—even among races on the
same side. Let us make sure that none of our allies regret having
offered aid to Stormwind.”
They were looking at one another, nodding in agreement.
“I intend to travel to the lands of our steadfast friends,” Anduin
informed them. “To thank them in person for their sacrifices, to offer
what we can so their economic recovery will be swift, and to enlist
their aid as well.”
He had expected Greymane to protest, and the older man did not
disappoint. “Your people are in Stormwind,” Genn reminded the king
unnecessarily. “They need you here. And Gilneas, at least, needs no
royal visit.”
No. Gilneas did not. It never had. In years past, by the order of
Greymane himself, Gilneas had cut itself off from all contact with
anything outside its massive stone walls. The kingdom had not come
to the aid of others when they were in need, and that isolation had
evoked anger and resentment toward the Gilneans, at least at the
outset, when they at last had been forced to abandon their selfimposed seclusion. But now there was nothing left of the once great
realm but ruins, shades, and sorrow.
“You were angry with me, as I recall, when I ventured into the
Broken Isles to see the place where my father fell,” Anduin replied
mildly.
“Of course I was. You left Stormwind and told no one,” Greymane
retorted. “You hadn’t even named a successor. Still haven’t, by the
way. What would have happened if you’d been killed?”
“But I wasn’t,” Anduin countered. “And my leaving was the right
thing to do.” More gently, he continued. “Genn, you told me I didn’t
need to see that place. But I did. To me, my father’s sacrifice has made
it hallowed ground. It is where I found Shalamayne—or perhaps I
should say, where it found me. It is where I…” He paused. He was not
yet ready to tell anyone what he had experienced, not even Velen, the
Prophet, who would have understood.
“Where I truly accepted the mantle of my kingship,” he said instead.
He cleared his throat; his voice was too thick. “Where I was able to
lead the Alliance to a hard-won victory. Yes. Stormwind’s people need
me. But so do those in Ironforge and Darnassus. This is how we use
peace. To lay the groundwork for unity and prosperity so that perhaps
war might one day be relegated to the history books.”
It was a noble goal, but perhaps an unattainable one. Most of those
around the table seemed to think the latter. But Anduin was
determined to try.
—
“Ol’ Emma” was what most people in Stormwind knew her as. She was
all right with that nickname; she was old, after all, and it was usually
spoken with friendliness. But she had a real name—Felstone—and a
past, just like everyone else. She had loved and been loved once, and if
sometimes she got lost in the past because, well, that was where
everyone was, then so be it.
First it was her husband, Jem, who had died in the First War. But
people died in war, didn’t they? And they were honored and
remembered in ceremonies like the ones that sweet boy-king had led.
Anduin Wrynn reminded her so much of her own bright boys. Three
of them there had been: Little Jem, named for his father; Jack, named
for his uncle John; and Jake. They, too, had died in a war, just like her
sister, Janice. Except that war was worse than the one that had just
ended, in a way. Her sons had perished because of Arthas Menethil
and his war on the living. They’d been warriors of Lordaeron, given
places of honor as King Terenas’s guards. They’d fallen along with
their king and their kingdom.
But no one honored their names with a formal ceremony. No one
thought of them as war heroes. They’d been turned into mindless
undead monstrosities. They were still in that brutally cruel state, were
dead, or had become one of the Banshee Queen’s Forsaken.
Whatever her beautiful sons’ final fate, they were lost to her, and the
living world of humans spoke of such horrors only in whispers.
She gripped the handle of the bucket she carried and focused on her
task: drawing water from the well. Thinking of Jem, Jack, and Jake
was never a good thing. The places it dragged her mind and heart—
Emma gripped the handle of her bucket more tightly as she
approached the well. Focus on what the living need, she told herself.
Not the dead.
Or the undead.
“I
heard that you spoke most eloquently at the service today, Your
Majesty.”
Anduin smiled tiredly at the elderly servant. He was quite capable of
preparing for bed himself, but Wyll Benton had taken care of him
since he was a little boy and would be offended if his service was
refused.
“Princes and kings have so much to worry about,” he had said once,
the first time Anduin had tried to decrease his duties. “The last thing
they need is to bother themselves with things like candlewick
trimming and hanging their clothes properly.”
He was tall and heavyset, though Anduin noted that he’d slimmed
down some recently. His mild, somewhat detached demeanor
disguised a stubborn will and fierce devotion to the house of Wrynn.
So much has changed, and most of it not for the better, Anduin
thought. But at least Wyll is a constant.
“If indeed I was eloquent, it was the Light speaking through me to
comfort those in need of it,” Anduin replied.
“You underestimate yourself, Your Majesty. You’ve always had a way
with words.”
Wyll removed Anduin’s belt, hanging the mace Fearbreaker
reverently from a hook on the wall near the king’s bed. The servant
himself had mounted the hook there, where Anduin could reach it at
any moment. Just in case, he had said. The prince Anduin had been at
the time had rolled his eyes at that, but the man he had become felt his
heart warm at the unspoken expression of concern of a man who was
more than a servant—Wyll was an old friend.
“You’re too kind,” Anduin said.
“Oh, sir,” Wyll sighed, “I’m never that, as you well know.”
Anduin pressed his lips together to keep from smiling outright. His
spirits lifted, and he couldn’t resist teasing Wyll.
“You’ll be pleased to hear we’re going back to Ironforge soon. Unless
you’d rather not?”
“Why, Your Majesty, why would I not? There’s nothing like the
constant heat and clanging of a continuously running giant forge to
make certain one rests well. Besides, surely nothing bad ever happens
in Ironforge. No one gets turned to diamond, or is buried beneath
rubble, or taken hostage, or forced to flee for his life,” the old servant
continued in a voice just shy of sarcastic.
Wyll had accompanied Anduin on his last visit to Ironforge, shortly
before the Cataclysm had forever altered the face of Azeroth. All the
things the servant had just mentioned, along with many others, had
occurred on that eventful trip, and two of them had happened to
Anduin.
The words, meant as a joke—at least as much of a joke as Wyll could
manage—caused another wave of sorrow to flow over the young king.
This one, though, was different; the loss was older. Time had
mellowed the pain, though it would never completely leave him. At his
king’s silence, Wyll looked at him as he hung up the coat.
“Your pardon, Your Majesty,” he said, his voice heavy with remorse.
“I didn’t mean to make light of your loss.”
“Of Khaz Modan’s loss,” Anduin said. The earthquake in Dun
Morogh, its tremors felt even in Ironforge, had marked the first
indication that the unhappy world was in true peril. Anduin had gone
to Dun Morogh to assist with the rescue efforts. He had not yet
embraced the path of priesthood, but he knew first aid and desperately
wanted to help. The round of aftershocks claimed the life of Aerin
Stonehand, the young dwarf woman who had been assigned to train
him.
It was the first time Anduin had lost anyone close to his age. And, if
he was being honest with himself, he had begun to feel more than
simple friendship toward the bright-eyed, lively warrior.
“It’s all right,” he reassured Wyll. “Things are better there now.
Magni’s awoken from his…ah, communing with the earth, I’m just
fine, and the Three Hammers are working together like a well-oiled
gnomish machine.”
Magni Bronzebeard, who had been king of Ironforge at the time, had
participated in a ritual that would “make him one with the earth.” All
had hoped the rite would give some insight into the distressed world,
but the ritual had been quite literal, not metaphorical. It had turned
Magni into diamond. At the time, the already beleaguered city had
grieved deeply. Thank the Light, it transpired that Magni had not been
killed…but he had been changed. Now, Anduin had been told that the
former king spoke with—and for—Azeroth herself. No one was sure
where or how to find him; he wandered the world and came when
needed.
Anduin wondered if he would ever see Magni again. He hoped so.
“Even so, sir,” Wyll said. “Of course I’ll come with you.”
Of course he would. As far as Anduin knew, the devoted servant had
no family of his own, and he had served the Wrynns for most of his
life. Anduin didn’t need Wyll’s tending—he was quite capable of
hanging up a coat by himself and removing his own boots—but as
increasing age prohibited Wyll from doing many things, Anduin knew
his childhood servant still wanted to feel that he was of use. Anduin
cherished Wyll not for what he did but for who he was.
“I’ll be glad of your company,” Anduin said, and he was. “That will
be all for now, though. Good night, Wyll.”
The old man bowed. “Good night, Your Majesty.”
Anduin watched him close the door, smiling affectionately after him.
When the door snicked shut, he turned back to his dressing table. The
amber-hued stone, still wrapped in the handkerchief, sat beside two
items that held great personal meaning for Anduin. One was a small
carved box that contained Queen Tiffin’s engagement and wedding
rings. The other was the compass Anduin once had given his father.
He looked at the white piece of fabric for a moment, but it was the
compass he reached for, the same one that had been recovered and
returned to him by an adventurer who had helped the distraught new
king on his first steps toward healing his grief.
He opened the compass now and regarded the portrait of a little boy
painted within, cheeks still round with childhood’s softness. After all
he had beheld and experienced in the last few months, Anduin
wondered if he had ever truly been as young as the artist had depicted
him.
A compass. Something to keep you on the right path.
There had been a clear compass in fighting the Burning Legion.
Clear, good, true, and powerful. Anduin knew the immediate next step
in his path. To meet with his allies, help them aid their own people,
and demonstrate how valuable he considered those ties. To ask for
their assistance in learning more about this strange mineral—and keep
it from being misused. After that…
He closed his eyes. Light, he prayed, you have given me good
advisers and true who have helped me lead well thus far. I trust in
you to show me the next steps in their proper time. I have always
longed for peace, and now peace of a sort is upon us. And this
material…it could be used to further that peace in ways we can’t even
begin to imagine.
Give me the guidance to lead well now, too.
He placed the compass down gently, blew out the single candle Wyll
had left burning on the nightstand, and had no dreams.
—
In the morning, Anduin called for a less formal gathering in the
receiving room outside his private quarters. He had spent many a
night there, dining alone with his father. He still had difficulty
thinking of the room as belonging to him now.
“I had almost forgotten we were heading into summer,” Greymane
said as he helped himself to a sweet-smelling, perfectly ripe peach.
Amberseed buns, Stromgarde cheese, herbed eggs, ham, bacon, fresh
sunfruit, and pastries also had been laid out, and milk, coffee, tea, and
a selection of juices were provided to wash it down.
As a worgen, Greymane had hunted for food in a way that the rest of
the Alliance could not, and could feed upon things others could not.
Worgen were, in many ways, the strongest and best suited to war, for
the adage that an army marched on its stomach was a true one. But
clearly the king of Gilneas still relished the taste of summer’s first
fruits.
It seemed most of them had slept well, as had the young king. He
wondered if it was an effect of the stone. After a few pleasantries about
the meal, the king steered the conversation to practicalities.
“Genn,” he said, helping himself to a second serving of eggs, “I
would like to ask you to look after my kingdom while I am away. I can’t
think of anyone better to tend to it than someone already familiar with
what that entails. Don’t worry,” he added, smiling, “I promise I’ll
formalize it before I leave this time.”
Slowly, Genn put down his fork. “Your Majesty,” he said, “I am
honored. I will serve Stormwind as I have served two of its kings. But I
am an old man. You might do well to begin looking for a way to have
someone younger rule should anything happen to you.”
Inwardly Anduin sighed. This was not the first time the subject of an
heir had been brought up. He chose to ignore it, but he was almost
certain that Genn would reference it at least once more before he left
for Ironforge even though Anduin had made his opinion quite clear.
He was not going to marry a woman he didn’t love.
“I’m pleased you accept,” Anduin said, dodging the entire issue and
turning to Velen before Genn could pursue it. “Prophet, I hope you will
accompany me on my journey both to Ironforge and overseas. I have
not forgotten the draenei who still guard the Exodar. I would see them
and thank them.”
The white-bearded draenei inclined his head, moved. “It is an honor
to accompany you, Your Majesty. It will mean so much to my people.”
“It will mean much to me as well,” Anduin replied, buttering his
toast. Butter, he thought. Something he took for granted when so
many didn’t have so much as a slice of bread. “What can Stormwind
offer the draenei to show our deep appreciation for their aid against
our mutual enemy?”
“That Your Majesty cares enough to even inquire after all that you
have endured will surely warm their hearts.”
The young king placed the butter knife down and regarded his old
friend. “You know more of endurance than any of us,” he said quietly.
“Of suffering, of loss.”
Liam Greymane was not the only son who had left behind a loving
father. More than even this deeply personal loss was the one that
Velen’s people had suffered. Argus, their beloved homeworld, not only
had become overrun with corrupted eredar but had been deliberately
tortured for eons by the fallen titan Sargeras. The very soul of that
broken world had risen to turn on anyone and everyone, even those
who had liberated it and sought to help it. Even now, Anduin could
hardly bear to think of it, and he prayed to the Light that their own
world, their beautiful Azeroth, which had sustained such varied and
marvelous forms of life, would not suffer the same fate.
Velen’s face softened with sorrow that would never, could never, be
assuaged, but his voice was warm as he spoke. “It is precisely because
we know so much of the darkness of this universe that we focus
instead on that which is good and kind and true. I say again, your
presence in the violet halls of our city will soothe our spirits more than
you yet understand.”
There was no arguing with a draenei, Anduin thought. A smile
quirked his lips. “It’s as you wish, my old friend. But I ask that you set
your mind to thinking of something more tangible we can bring as
well.”
The ancient being’s own lips curved in a smile that was eternally
youthful. “I will see what I can come up with.”
“Good. More pressing is what we need to bring to Ironforge, as it’s
the first city I intend to visit. What can we offer the dwarves as a gift
that they would most appreciate?”
For a moment, brows were furrowed in contemplation. And then, as
one, all of them, even the great Prophet Velen, began to laugh.
G
rizzek Fizzwrench stepped outside his simple ramshackle hut into
the lazy, slowly fading heat of the late afternoon. He smiled at the
familiar sound of the ocean lapping against the shore, the rustle of the
palm trees. The nostrils on his large, long nose flared and his narrow
chest expanded as he breathed in the salty air.
“Another beautiful day all to myself,” he said aloud, cracking his
neck, knuckles, and toes in a lovely long stretch. Then, with a cackle of
anticipation, he plunged into the surf.
Once he’d been an ordinary goblin. Just like all the others, he’d lived
in cramped, less than hygienic slums and shantytowns, performing
unsavory deeds for even more unsavory people. It had been fine when
he was on Kezan, but when that island…well, exploded—which islands
were really not supposed to do—and the refugees of the Bilgewater
Cartel moved to Azshara, things changed.
He didn’t like Azshara, for one thing. It was too autumnal for his
summer spirit. All those orange and red and brown colors. He liked
the blue of sky and sea and that bright yellow sand and the soothing
waving of green-fronded palm trees. Then, when the shredders began
tearing up the land, rendering it ugly, he disliked Azshara even more.
The idea of wasting both time and money—which were kind of one and
the same—reshaping a part of Azshara to make a symbol of the Horde
seemed like the worst brownnosing Grizzek had ever seen—and he’d
seen a lot.
And all those other races in the Horde: they just didn’t seem to
understand the goblin mentality. The “deaders,” as he thought of the
Forsaken, gave him the creeps, and the only thing they seemed to
enjoy tinkering with was poisons. The orcs thought they were better
than everyone else. “Original Horde” and all that claptrap. The tauren
were too in love with the land to make any reasonable person
comfortable, and the whole thing the trolls had going on with the loa
scared the crap out of him. Pandaren were just too…well…nice. He’d
met a blood elf or two he could share a beer with, but the race as a
whole was way too pretty, and they liked pretty things, and goblins
and their culture most definitely did not qualify as pretty things.
But the very worst part of joining the Horde was that the union had
elevated Jastor Gallywix from a simple slimy trade prince to the
powerful slimy leader of an entire Horde faction. And then one day,
quite suddenly, as if a switch had been flipped, Grizzek had had
enough.
He had taken everything he owned—all of his laboratory
knickknacks, books filled with years of painstakingly detailed notes on
experiments, and a small warehouse full of supplies—and moved here,
to a deserted beach in Tanaris.
Working alone in the sweltering sun, which turned his pale yellowgreen skin to a rich forest-emerald hue, he had constructed a small,
modest domicile and a not so small, not very modest laboratory.
Grizzek found that he flourished in solitude and sunlight. He rose in
the late afternoon, went for a swim, and broke his fast, then headed in
to work during the cooler evening and night hours. Over the years,
he’d constructed a bristling defense system composed of robots,
alarums, whistles, and other warning devices.
His favorite such device was Feathers, the unimaginatively named
robotic parrot who provided what passed for company. Feathers flew
reconnaissance several times a day, using its mechanical eyes to scan
for anything out of the ordinary. It would immediately alert Grizzek to
trouble. And then…well, depending on the nature of the intruder, they
would be sent off with a gruff warning or else a blast of the Goblin
Dragon Gun Mark II he always kept handy.
It was a beautiful life. And he had made many beautiful things. Well,
beautiful might not be the right word. He’d made things that blew
other things up in a spectacular fashion and practical gizmos that
made it possible for him not to worry about cooking, cleaning, or,
really, anything other than creating more gadgets and explosive
devices.
And so of course, when Feathers suddenly appeared while he was
lying on his back, floating lazily, and squawked loudly, “Intruder alert,
west side entrance!” it meant that his beautiful life was probably about
to implode.
Grizzek grimaced, listening to Feathers’s report. When it came to a
single name, though, his eyes snapped open.
He swore long, loudly, and colorfully, and swam back to shore.
—
“Trade Prince,” Grizzek said a few moments later, standing at the main
gate, dripping and wearing nothing but a towel. “I thought we had a
deal. You got to keep all my inventions, I got to leave the cartel with
supplies and peace of mind.”
Trade Prince Jastor Gallywix, garishly dressed as always, his round
bulging tummy preceding him by almost two full paces, merely smiled.
He had brought with him several bruisers, including the musclebound Druz, his chief enforcer.
“Hey, Druz,” Grizzek added.
“Yo, Grizzek,” Druz replied.
“Is this how you greet an old friend?” Gallywix boomed.
Grizzek stared at him flatly.
“Traditional goblin etiquette demands that you invite in a trade
prince!”
“Actually, no,” Grizzek shot back. “It don’t, and anyway, I ain’t never
been much for etiquette.” Druz leaned against the doorway, cleaning
his nails with a knife. The thought of being stabbed with a knife coated
with what was under Druz’s fingernails was horrifying.
Gallywix’s smile didn’t falter. “Twelve extremely strong goblins,
many of them with guns trained on you, demand that you invite in a
trade prince.”
Grizzek drooped. He sighed heavily. “Okay, okay. What’s this all
about, Gallywix?” he asked, not bothering with the Horde leader’s title.
“What’s it always about?”
“Creative expression, intellectual stimulation, and sound sleep at
night?” Grizzek offered.
“Of course not! This is business. A, shall we say, golden
opportunity.” Gallywix gestured with his cane.
Grizzek’s eyes automatically went to the orb perched atop it. He’d
seen it a thousand times, that bright red—
He blinked.
“It’s gold,” he said.
“Not gold gold, but yes.”
“Ah. So that’s the pun.”
Gallywix’s smile faded somewhat, and Grizzek relished the fact that
he was getting underneath the trade prince’s skin. “Yes,” he said.
“That’s the pun.”
“It used to be red.”
Gallywix frowned, and his chins jiggled with irritation. “It did. Same
adornment, different color. C’mon, Grizzy, you gotta be intrigued by
that at least!”
Damn the goblin, Grizzek was intrigued. Curiosity, as it always did,
got the better of him. Besides, he could stand having his supplies
replenished.
I’m gonna regret this, he thought, then opened the gate to admit
Gallywix. “Just you,” he said as Druz tried to step in. “I only got one
chair.”
“S’okay. I’ll stand,” Druz said.
What passed for the kitchen was cramped with three goblins
crammed into it, and there was indeed only one chair. While Gallywix
tried to maneuver his bulk into it, Grizzek excused himself to put on a
pair of pants and a linen shirt, then stood and listened. Gallywix spoke
of delving too deeply into the heart of Kezan, of the single golden
glorious vein they had found that had petered out, of how the power of
this substance had surged, then seemingly died as time passed,
turning from a warm honey hue to red as a drop of human blood.
His eyes initially were fixed on the trade prince, but his gaze
wandered toward the cane as the story grew ever more fantastic.
“And then,” Gallywix was saying, “along comes this giant, titanwhipped-up sword, plunged right into Silithus. The earth opened up,
and there were veins and veins of the stuff, flowing like a beautiful
river of pure honey. Of course, I and I alone truly understood what it
was, so I jumped right on it. Right now, we got lots of people mining it
and making sure only the right people get it.”
“I am deeply skeptical that this stuff is the wonder you think it is,
Trade Prince.” Grizzek glanced over at Druz for confirmation of the
story. Oddly, he and the chief muscle Gallywix employed had always
gotten along pretty well. Druz shrugged his massive shoulders.
Gallywix’s ugly smile deepened, and the small eyes twinkled. “The
proof is in the pudding.”
Grizzek blinked. “What does that even mean?”
“No idea, but it sounds good. Look, I’ll make a deal with you. Take
the cane, touch the top, and see what happens. If you don’t want to be
involved in working with this stuff, just say the word. I’ll be out of your
hair.”
“I’m bald.”
“Figure of speech.”
“Okay, but how’s about we take it a step further. If you want my
help, I get to dictate what I do, what I make, and how it’s used.”
That did not sit well with the top-hatted trade prince. The smile
froze as if Gallywix had run afoul of an angry frost mage. “You’re not
the only engineer in the world, you know.”
“True enough. But I know you wouldn’t have tracked me down after
all this time if you didn’t need my help.”
“Grizzek,” Gallywix said, sighing, “you are too smart for your own
good.”
Grizzek waited, arms crossed. “All right, all right,” the goblin leader
said crossly. “But you only get paid a small percentage.”
“We’ll negotiate my hourly fee and benefits after I decide.”
Again, Gallywix stuck out the cane. Grizzek grasped it. He closed his
other hand over the top.
Everything in the room suddenly came into hyperfocus. The color
amplified. The lines were sharp, clean. He heard layers in the sound of
the ocean, could almost feel the vibrations of birdsong.
And his mind—
It raced, tumbled pell-mell, analyzing and calculating what
percentage of his hand was in contact with the orb, to what degree a
callus or the sheen of sweat on his suddenly damp palm inhibited
contact, to what uses this could be put—
Grizzek snatched his hand away as if it had been burned. It was
glorious—almost too much.
“Holy mackerel,” he muttered.
“See?”
The engineer’s body was still vibrating from the experience, his
heart racing, his hands trembling. He knew he had a brilliant mind. He
knew he was a genius. It was why Gallywix had sought him out. And
the trade prince had been right to do so, because the things that could
be created with this stuff…
“I, uh…Okay. I’ll work on it. Run experiments, design some
prototypes.”
Gallywix’s smile was cruelly happy now. “I thought you’d come
around.”
“My demand still stands,” Grizzek insisted. “I want full autonomy on
this.” He’d betrayed himself earlier with his reaction, he knew, but it
wasn’t too late to salvage something. He’d been startled, that was all,
and now he brought his best poker face to bear.
“You’re dying to get your hands on it, and you know it.”
Grizzek shrugged, trying to imitate Druz’s utter lack of interest.
“Bah, all right,” Gallywix huffed. “But I’m going to have some of my
people out here from now on.”
“Go right ahead,” Grizzek said. He knew full well that he wouldn’t be
venturing far from this stuff anyway. “But before we get started, I’m
going to write up a list of supplies. And top of that list”—he nodded at
the cane tip—“is a sample of that.”
“You’ll get plenty of this. Provided that plenty of new things created
with it start leaving here on a regular basis.”
“Of course, of course. And…” Oh, how he hated to say this. “I have
one more request. I’m gonna need my former lab partner to work with
me on this.”
“Sure, sure.” Gallywix had gotten what he wanted and clearly was
feeling generous. “Gimme a name; I’ll get ’em right to you.”
Grizzek told him.
Gallywix almost exploded, but a quarter of an hour later he had
relented.
It was with both relief and reluctance that Grizzek closed the door of
his little hut. He wiped off the chair in which Gallywix had sat, just
because, and plopped down into it.
This was either the best idea of his life…or the worst.
Grizzek suspected the latter.
A
nduin had performed all his kingly obligations, observing the
proper protocol upon arriving at the massive gates of Ironforge
and later during the lengthy formal meal. He’d had to pace himself.
Dwarves loved to eat and they loved to drink, and although Anduin
was larger than any of them, he was well aware that even the slightest
dwarf could drink him under the table if he wasn’t careful.
Moira Thaurissan, the daughter of Magni Bronzebeard and the
leader of the Dark Iron dwarf clan by marriage, was one of the Three
Hammers who governed Ironforge. She personally preferred wine to
the beloved beer of most dwarves, and she ensured the visiting king
was served one of Ironforge’s finest reds as they dined on braised boar
meat with plenty of hearty brown bread to sop the juices, vegetables
roasted with honey, and a mountain of pastries with which to end the
meal.
Anduin had wanted to convene a meeting with the Three Hammers
right away, but they had told him one needed time to digest such a
hearty meal. Unless it was a matter of immediate life or death, a pipe,
brandy, or more desserts were required first.
Moira, observing Anduin’s reaction to the option of any of the three,
suggested an hourlong amble around Ironforge instead to help them
digest. Anduin gratefully accepted. He invited the draenei to
accompany them, but Velen demurred, saying, “You two have much to
discuss, I am certain. I will stay here and converse with Muradin and
Falstad.” Muradin Bronzebeard, the middle brother of the three
Bronzebeards, represented his family’s clan in the Council of Three
Hammers. (The youngest of the famous brothers, Brann, had founded
the Explorers’ League and had too much wanderlust in him to stay in
Ironforge.) Falstad Wildhammer, the third Hammer and the leader of
the famed Wildhammer clan, raised a stein to the draenei.
“Pipe, brandy, or dessert?” Anduin quipped.
“Dessert, I think,” Velen replied. “It seems the most innocuous
choice.”
“Have my share. If I eat another bite, I’ll burst.”
“Mind if we have a bit of company?” Moira asked as they rose and
left the table.
“Of course; anyone you like.”
The queen spoke quietly with one of the guards, who nodded and
stepped out. A few minutes later, he returned, escorting a little dwarf
boy. The child’s skin was an unusual but appealingly warm shade of
gray. His eyes were large and green, holding no hint of the red glow
common to the Dark Iron dwarves, and his hair was white. Anduin
knew at once who it had to be: Moira’s son, Magni Bronzebeard’s
grandson, and the heir to the throne, Prince Dagran.
“I know we’ve met before, Your Majesty, but I’m afraid I don’t
remember it,” the young prince said with perfect politeness and little
more than a trace of the local dwarven accent. How old was he? Six,
seven? Anduin recalled that he, too, had been schooled in etiquette
and courtesies appropriate to the child of a king when he was even
younger than this lad.
“I’d be astonished if you did. Let us consider this our first meeting.”
Anduin leaned forward and extended his hand in a formal manner,
and the boy shook it solemnly. “I’m glad you could join us on our walk
today. So…what’s your favorite place in Ironforge?”
The boy’s eyes lit up. “Th’ Hall o’ Explorers!”
Anduin shot Moira a pleased look as he replied, “Mine, too. Let’s
go!” Once they had reached the hall and had enjoyed looking around
it, he would ask Moira to summon Falstad, Muradin, and Velen. Then
Anduin would reveal the second reason why he had come to Ironforge.
As they made their leisurely way toward their destination, human
and dwarf guards following at a discreet yet expedient distance,
Anduin indulged himself in nostalgia. Heat buffeted him as they
passed the Great Forge that gave the ancient city its name. The
distinctive smell of molten metal transported him back to his last visit
a few years earlier.
“It’s been too long since I’ve been here,” he said to Moira.
Moira’s green eyes were on her son as she replied, “Aye, it has. The
years go by faster than we think.”
Regarding the boy who was clearly struggling not to race ahead of
his mother and the human king, Anduin said to Moira, “It was good of
the Three Hammers to come to Stormwind to honor my father.
Especially given the fact that the last time I was here, he tried to kill
you.”
Moira chuckled. “Oh, lad, you know he and I made our peace over
that long ago. By the time we lost him, we’d come to admire and
respect each other. Your father was angry at me for keeping you here.
He was worried for your safety. As Dagran’s grown, impossible as it
seems, that boy has become more precious to me by the day. Big as
Varian Wrynn was, I’d have torn him apart with my bare hands had he
kidnapped my wee one.” A fierce expression flickered across her face.
“I believe you,” Anduin said, and he did. “Dwarves are fighters,
that’s for sure.”
“He was proud of you,” Moira said quietly. “Even when he didn’t
understand you. Don’t think he only loved you in the later years, Your
Majesty.”
“I don’t. I knew. And please,” Anduin said, “just call me Anduin. I’m
more used to friendship than formality here. When I came to visit,
your father asked me to call him Uncle Magni, and Aerin called me ‘li’l
lion.’ ”
“Aerin?”
“A young woman who was the first female in your father’s guard.
You’d have liked her. She was trying to improve my abilities with
sword and shield before she died at Kharanos.”
“Ah,” Moira said, regarding him speculatively. “Lost your first
friend, did you? I’m sorry.” She brightened a little. “But at least from
what I hear, her teaching wasn’t wasted. You’re not the warrior your
father was, but there’s no shame in that, and I understand your
swordsmanship isn’t half bad these days.”
He gave her a wry smile. “Surprising everyone, no doubt.”
“Well, maybe just a wee bit.”
Anduin chuckled. “I’m definitely not the warrior Father was. Never
will be. No one will.” I can’t be the hero you were, he had said,
kneeling where his father had died. I can’t be the king you were. He
turned to her, deciding to confide in her.
“But I will tell you something. Before I met Aerin, I hated heavy
weapons training. I avoided it as much as possible, and I became
extremely creative with my excuses. But after she died, I began
training in earnest. I didn’t shirk it anymore. I wanted to become, if
not a superior swordsman, a good one at least. The Light has blessed
me with other gifts. I trust in it to aid me even if I have no weapon in
my hand at all. Aerin promised to ‘dwarf-temper’ me, and she did.”
Moira laughed out loud at that. “That’s as good a term as I’ve ever
heard! Dwarf-tempered, eh? Well. You’re a fine specimen, Anduin
Wrynn, and I’m proud my people have contributed to the man you’ve
grown up to be.”
“Thank you. I’m honored to have such a strong personal friendship
with the dwarves—all of them.” He hesitated. “You all do seem to be
getting along.”
“We’re dwarves,” she said, shrugging. “Words fly. Sometimes so do
beer steins. Although I’m thinking that the latter will happen less often
when they’re full. We’re most grateful for your gift.”
“I could tell.” When Anduin had made his formal entrance to
Ironforge a few hours earlier, he’d been greeted by the Three
Hammers and an honor guard. They’d made him welcome in this, his
first visit as a ruling king. And he knew that welcome was genuine.
But when the ten wagons bearing Stormwind’s gift rolled up and the
protective covering was whisked off the first one, thunderous applause
and cheers rang out.
The gift, of course, was barley, the key ingredient in what was
arguably Ironforge’s best-loved export.
“Think of it as Stormwind’s contribution to peace and goodwill in
Ironforge,” Anduin said.
“Once you’re done with your travels, hurry back and we’ll toast you
with the first batch,” Moira promised. “I’ve heard the brewmasters are
going to call it Anduin’s Amber Ale.”
That got a full-fledged laugh out of him. She joined in. “I can’t
remember the last time I laughed like that,” he said. “It feels…good.”
“Aye, it does. To answer your question before we got sidetracked on
the extremely important topic of beer, the Hammers have been able to
work through things, yes.”
“And…how is your father?”
“Well,” she said, “he’s diamond, now, and Light knows where he is
from day to day. Would you like to see where he was?”
“Yes. I would.”
Dagran paused. Up ahead, Anduin could glimpse the shape of the
familiar winged skeleton through the archways that marked the Hall of
Explorers. The boy looked longingly at it and said, “As long as you
promise we come back t’ the pteradon!”
—
Magni had become one with the earth in Old Ironforge, a chamber
deep below the High Seat. The three descended, and Anduin could
almost feel the press of tons of stone and earth above him. The
dwarves, of course, had no such unease as their path took them deeper
still.
Anduin knew that the dais where Magni had been turned to
diamond would be empty. He knew. Even so, actually seeing it was a
shock.
He had been present on that day when King Magni Bronzebeard had
performed the ancient ritual. Now he stood, wordless, as Dagran
ascended the steps nimbly before his mother and the visiting ruler,
bypassing translucent blue-tinted chunks that once had formed the
diamond encasement of the diamond king. The boy went straight for a
scroll that had been safely mounted behind glass and began to read
aloud. The hairs at the back of Anduin’s neck prickled as he heard
again the words that had been spoken by Advisor Belgrum, now
uttered in the treble tones of Magni’s grandchild.
“ ‘And here are the why and th’ how, to again become one wi’ the
mountain. For behold, we are earthen, o’ the land, an’ its soul is ours,
its pain is ours, its heartbeat is ours. We sing its song an’ weep for its
beauty. For who would not wish t’ return home? That is the why, O
children o’ the earth.’ ” Dagran looked up. “Should I keep going?”
“No, sweet boy,” Moira said.
Anduin bent and picked up one of the shards. “It was a terrible thing
to behold,” he said quietly, turning over the diamond chunk in his
hands. “It happened so quickly and so completely. I thought he was
dead.”
“And why would you not?” Moira said. “Even we dwarves thought
so.”
“That had to have been a tremendous shock when he awoke.”
“That phrase,” Moira said, “does not begin to capture it. All I can say
is it’s a good thing dwarven hearts are almost as strong as stone.”
Anduin hesitated. “I’m so glad. Not just for me and my friendship
with him but for you. There was a time I thought my father and I
would never become a real family, but we did.”
Moira was quiet for a while. Her bright, bookish son was busying
himself with another ancient tome, his green eyes flicking over ancient
words. When she spoke, she pitched her voice low.
“It’s for that child that I’d want that more than for myself,” she said.
“It’s…a lot to undo, Anduin. But he said he wanted to try.”
“Will you?” Anduin asked, speaking quietly so the boy could not
hear.
“I think my people and my son would be best served by having good
relationships with a being who speaks directly to Azeroth.” It was an
attempt at lightness, but it fell flat.
“But what about you?”
Again Moira was silent. She had just opened her mouth to speak
when a voice interrupted her.
“Yer Highness, Yer Majesty, come quickly!” It was one of the guards
usually stationed at the High Seat. He was flushed and out of breath.
“What is it?” Moira demanded.
“It’s yer father! He’s here! And he needs tae see you two right away!”
Magni Bronzebeard awaited them in the Hall of Explorers.
Anduin, who once had looked on, helpless to intervene, as the
king was agonizingly transformed into gleaming stone, had thought he
would be prepared to meet the awakened Magni.
He was not.
Magni stood beneath the pteradon skeleton with his back to the
entrance, deep in conversation with Velen and High Explorer Muninn
Magellas. Falstad and Muradin stood beside them, listening intently,
their bushy eyebrows drawn together in concern.
High Tinker Gelbin Mekkatorque, the white-bearded leader of the
gnomes whose cheerful demeanor belied his deep, quiet wisdom, also
had been summoned. Anduin had scheduled a meeting with him for
the next day. The gnomes had been invaluable against the Legion, and
he wanted to make sure he had a chance to thank the physically
smallest but perhaps intellectually greatest members of the Alliance.
The presence of the high tinker’s adviser, the gruff warrior Captain
Tread Sparknozzle, whose black eye patch was testimony to his years
of battlefield experience, indicated that this was no mere diplomatic
visit on Magni’s part.
When the glittering shape turned to Anduin, the young king felt as if
he had been punched in the gut. A thing made of stone should not
move so gracefully, nor should its diamond beard flutter with that
movement. Magni was neither the dwarf he had been nor the statue he
had become; he was both and neither, and the juxtaposition struck
Anduin on a profound level. A heartbeat later, though, gratitude and
joy flooded him at Magni’s words.
“Anduin! My, ye’ve grown!”
The phrase loathed by children everywhere was transformed by the
power of nostalgia and the inexorable arrival of adulthood. It was so
ordinary a phrase, so real, that the illusion of “other” was as shattered
as Magni’s diamond prison had been. The voice was warm, living, and
very definitely Magni’s. Anduin wondered whether the diamond
“flesh” would be warm, too, if he were to touch the being who now
strode toward him. But the spurs and shards that dotted the dwarfshaped form precluded the enthusiastic handshakes and crushing
hugs that Magni had been so prone to in his former incarnation.
Had Moira or Dagran found a way around that? Did Magni even
wish to bestow the gestures he’d been so free with during his life as a
being of flesh and blood? For the sake of all of them, Anduin hoped so.
Moira had asked Belgrum to take care of Dagran, who had protested
that he wanted to meet his grandfather. We’ll see, she said. Her face
wasn’t hard exactly, but it was concerned.
“Magni,” Anduin said. “It is so good to see you.”
“And ye and me daughter.” Magni turned his stone eyes to Moira. “I
dare tae hope that once me duty’s done here, I might be able tae meet
me grandson. But sadly, a visit’s nae what I’ve come about.”
Of course not. Magni spoke for Azeroth now, and that was a great
and solemn duty. Anduin’s gaze flickered to the draenei. Velen was not
a maudlin soul. He smiled easily and warmly and often laughed. But
he had known so much pain that it was those lines his ancient face
remembered, cutting through his visage as if they had been chiseled,
and they were set in a grim expression now.
Magni regarded Moira, Anduin, and Velen seriously. “I’ve sought
the three o’ ye out nae because all o’ ye are leaders o’ yer people but
because ye are priests.”
Moira and Anduin exchanged surprised glances. Anduin was aware
of this commonality, of course, but for some reason he hadn’t given
much thought to it.
“She’s in terrible pain,” he said, his diamond face, seemingly so
hard, furrowing easily into an empathetic wince. Anduin wondered if
the rite that had so transformed Magni meant that he could now
literally sense Azeroth’s pain. Anduin thought of the destruction of
Silithus, of the almost inconceivable size of the sword now towering
over the landscape. If Sargeras’s last attempt to destroy Azeroth had
come close to succeeding, it was a terrifying thought.
“She needs healin’. An’ that’s what priests do. She made it clear that
all must heal her or all will perish.”
Velen and Moira turned to each other. “I believe that the words your
father has spoken are true,” the draenei said. “If we do not tend to our
wounded world—as many of us as possible—then most assuredly we
all will perish. There are others who must hear this message.”
“Aye,” Moira said, “and I think it’s time that the lad met the rest of
us.”
And as one, the two turned to look directly at Anduin.
Anduin’s brow furrowed in confusion. “The rest of whom?”
“Other priests,” Moira said. “The Prophet and I have been working
with a group you’re long overdue to get to know.”
And then Anduin understood. “The Conclave. In the Netherlight
Temple.”
The very name seemed to set calm upon Anduin’s soul, almost in
defiance of the temple’s history as the prison for Saraka, a void lord
and a fallen naaru, and its location in the heart of the Twisting Nether.
For eons, the draenei had studied the creature. Only recently had they
been able to purify it. Now, as its true self, Saa’ra, the naaru lingered,
embracing its former prison as a sanctuary it offered to others.
Anduin had heard about the struggle that had unfolded in the early
days of the Legion’s invasion. And he knew that many who now walked
its hallowed halls were, like the naaru itself, those who had fallen into
darkness but had been brought back into the Light. These priests,
known as the Conclave, had reached out to others on Azeroth so they
would join together to help stand against the onslaught of the Legion.
Although the threat had ended, the Conclave still existed, offering help
and compassion to all who would seek the Light.
“What the Conclave did and continues to do is so important,”
Anduin said. During the war, they had roamed Azeroth, recruiting
priests to tend to those who were on the front lines against the Legion.
Now they still tended to those courageous fighters as they dealt with
lasting injuries to body, mind, and spirit. Not all scars were physical. “I
wish I could have assisted their efforts during the war.”
“Dear boy,” Velen said, “you have always been right where you
needed to be. We have our own paths, our own struggles. My son’s fate
was mine. Moira’s path is overcoming prejudice and championing the
Dark Irons who believe in her. Yours was succeeding a great king and
governing the people who have loved you since your birth. It is time to
let go of regrets. There is no place for them in the Netherlight Temple.
It is a site filled with only hope and determination to follow where the
Light leads us and bring it into the dark places that so need its
blessing.”
“The Prophet, as he usually is, is dead right,” Moira said. “Though I
admit I’m pleased to finally be able to share this place with you.
Despite the dire nature behind this visit now, I know you’ll find some
balm for your soul there. It’s impossible not to.”
She spoke as one who herself had found such a balm. Anduin
thought of the strange material safely inside his pocket. He had
planned to show it to the Three Hammers after what was supposed to
have been a pleasant walk. Now he realized that no one would be
better able to identify the stone than Magni, who was still one with the
earth.
“We will go, but not yet. I thank you for your message, Magni. And…
there’s something I need to show you. All of you.” Briefly he
summarized what he knew about the amber material, realizing as he
spoke that it was precious little.
“We don’t know much,” he finished, “but I believe you can tell us
more.”
He withdrew the handkerchief and folded it open. The little gem
glowed its warm amber and blue hues.
Magni’s eyes filled with diamond tears. “Azerite,” he breathed.
Azerite. They had a name for it at last. “What is it?” Moira asked.
“Och,” Magni said softly, sadly, “I told ye she was hurtin’. Now ye
can see it fer yerselves. This…is part o’ her. It’s…bah, ’tis so hard tae
describe in words. Her essence, I suppose will do. More an’ more o’ it
is comin’ tae th’ surface.”
“Can she not heal herself?” Mekkatorque wanted to know.
“Aye, she can and has,” Magni replied. “Ye’ve nae forgotten th’
Cataclysm, have ye? But that fel thing that bastard stuck her wi’…” He
shook his head, looking like someone who was losing his beloved.
Anduin supposed he was.
“ ’Tis a good an’ noble effort she’s made, but one that’s destined tae
fail. Azeroth canna do it by hersel’. Nae this time. That’s why she’s
beggin’ fer our help!”
It all made sense. Perfect, devastating sense. Anduin passed the
small sample of Azerite to Moira. As all did, she went wide-eyed with
wonder at what she was feeling.
“We hear you,” he said to Magni, looking deep into the diamond
eyes. “We will do all we can. But we also need to make sure that this…
Azerite…isn’t used by the Horde.”
The Azerite pebble now rested in Muradin’s hands. He glowered.
“Enough o’ this and ye could take down a whole city.”
“Enough o’ this,” Falstad said, “an’ we could shatter th’ Horde.”
“We’re not at war,” Anduin said. “For now, our task is twofold—and
it’s clear. We need to heal Azeroth, and we need to keep this”—and he
accepted the Azerite—“safely away from the Horde.”
He regarded Mekkatorque. “If anyone can figure out how to put
this…this essence to good use for a worthy purpose, it’s your people.
Magni has told us that Azeroth is producing increasing amounts of this
substance. We will send you samples when we have obtained them.”
Gelbin nodded. “I’ll get my best minds on it. I think I know just the
person.”
“An’ I’ll talk tae the other members of th’ Explorers’ League an’ send
a team down tae Silithus,” Magellas said.
“All that’s grand,” Magni said even as he shook his head in sorrow.
To Anduin he said, “Aye, I ken that all this was a shocker tae ye, lad.
Off wi’ ye three. Go tae yer priest hall an’ let them know a whole world
might be dyin’.” He cleared his throat and straightened. “Right, then.
Me job’s done. I’ll be off.”
“Father,” Moira said. “If you aren’t called away by…by her…then I’d
ask you to stay for a bit.” She took a deep breath. “There’s a wee lad
who’s been pestering me about meeting you for some time now.”
THE NETHERLIGHT TEMPLE
Anduin stepped through a portal into a realm of wonder so beautiful,
so Light-filled, his heart seemed to break even as it swelled with joy.
He had spent much time in the Exodar and was accustomed to the
soothing purple light and the sense of peace that pervaded the place.
But this…this had the Exodar’s essence writ large, but with a different
touch.
The massive carved statues of draenei should have been
intimidating, towering over visitors as they did. Instead, they felt like
protective benevolent presences. The melodic sound of flowing water
came from both sides of the ramp that Anduin descended; sparks of
light floated up gently, as if created by the soft splashing.
He took a deep breath of the clean, sweet air as if he’d never truly
expanded his lungs before. Farther into the temple, down the long,
gentle incline, was a cluster of people. He knew who they were or,
rather, what they represented, and the knowledge filled him with quiet
anticipatory joy.
Velen laid a hand on the king’s shoulder as he had done so many
times over the last years and smiled.
“Yes,” he affirmed, seeing Anduin’s unspoken question. “They are all
here.”
“When you said priests,” Anduin said, “I assumed you meant…”
“Priests just like us,” Moira finished. She gestured to the various
individuals milling around them. Among their number Anduin saw
not only humans, gnomes, dwarves, draenei, and worgen—those who
would be at home in Stormwind’s Cathedral of Light—but also night
elves, who worshipped their moon goddess, Elune; tauren, who
followed their sun god, An’she; and…
“Forsaken,” he whispered as the hair along his arms and the back of
his neck lifted.
One of them stood, her stooped back toward him, cheerfully talking
with a draenei and a dwarf. There was another group heading toward
one of the hall’s alcoves, carefully bearing piles of no doubt ancient
tomes. This one consisted of a Forsaken, a night elf, and a worgen.
Words would not come. Anduin found himself staring openly,
hardly daring to blink lest it all turn out to be a dream. In Azeroth,
these groups would be killing one another—or, at the very least, they
would be suspicious, hate-filled, and fearful. The musical sound of a
night elf’s throaty laugh wafted to him.
Velen looked completely content, but Moira was eyeing him
carefully. “You all right, Anduin?”
He nodded. “Yes,” he said, his voice husky. “I can honestly say I’ve
never felt better. This…all this….” He shook his head, smiling. “It’s
what I’ve dreamed of seeing all my life.”
“We are priests before all else,” came a voice. It was masculine,
warm, and jovial, though it had a peculiar timbre to it, and as Anduin
turned, he fully expected to greet a human priest of the Light.
He found himself face-to-face with a Forsaken.
Anduin, schooled since childhood not to let his emotions show,
hoped he recovered sufficiently, but inwardly he was reeling. “So it
seems,” he said, his voice betraying his astonishment despite himself.
“And I am glad for it.”
“Your Majesty,” said Velen, “may I present Archbishop Alonsus
Faol.”
The Forsaken’s eyes glowed an eerie yellow. They couldn’t possibly
twinkle with amusement as a living man’s would, but somehow they
did.
“Don’t fret about not recognizing me,” the archbishop said. “I know
I don’t look like my portrait.” He lifted a bony hand and stroked his
chin. “I’ve lost the beard, you see. Slimmed down quite a bit, too.”
Oh, yes, those undead eyes were twinkling.
Anduin gave up any hope of behaving in a typically regal manner
here. We are priests before all else, the undead being had told him,
and he discovered it was a relief to put away the burden of royalty at
least temporarily. He smiled and bowed.
“You are a man out of history, sir,” Anduin told the archbishop in a
voice of awe. “You founded the paladin order—the Silver Hand. Uther
Lightbringer was your first apprentice. And Stormwind might not be
standing today were it not for your diligent efforts. To say it is an
honor to meet you doesn’t begin to describe it. You were…you are one
of my heroes.”
Anduin was utterly sincere. He’d pored through all the thick tomes
about the benevolent, Greatfather Winter–like priest. The words on
those pages painted a picture of a man who was quick to laugh but
stood as strong as stone. Historians, usually content with simply
recording dry facts, had waxed eloquent about Faol’s warmth and
kindliness. Portraits depicted him as a short, stout man with a bushy
white beard. The undead being who stood before the king of
Stormwind was still shorter than average but otherwise
unrecognizable. The beard was gone. Cut? Rotted away? And the hair
was dark with dried blood and ichor. He smelled like old vellum: dusty
but not unpleasant. Faol had died when Anduin was a child, and the
boy had never gotten to meet him.
Faol sighed. “I have done and been those things you have cited, true.
I have also been a mindless minion of the Scourge.” He lifted his bony
arms, indicating the glorious temple and those who tended it. “But
here the only thing that matters is that I am a priest first.”
“I’ve been working with the archbishop for some time now,” Moira
said. “He’s been helping me and the Dark Irons find and gather priests
for the temple. We needed to do that in order to stand against the
Legion, but even now that the crisis has passed, I still keep coming
here. The archbishop’s fine company. Considering he is, after all…you
know.” She paused. “A man with no beard.”
Anduin chuckled. He felt a familiar, welcome warmth in his chest as
he looked around, trying to be more evaluating in his assessment of
the place. Could this be a template for the future? Surely if gnome and
tauren, human and blood elf, Forsaken and dwarf, could bond
together for the common good, this could be re-created on a larger
scale on Azeroth.
The problem was that the priests, at least, had a common point they
all agreed on even if each saw the Light through a different lens, as it
were.
“There is another notable person I think you’d like to meet,” Faol
said to Anduin. “She, too, is from Lordaeron. But do not fear; she yet
breathes, though she faced many dangers with courage and the Light’s
aid. Come here, my dear.” His voice grew fond as he beckoned to a
smiling blond woman. She stepped forward, taking the archbishop’s
desiccated hand without hesitation, then turned to regard Anduin.
“Hello, Your Majesty,” she said. She was, he guessed, a little bit
older than Jaina, tall and slender with long golden hair and arresting
blue-green eyes. She looked familiar somehow, though Anduin knew
he had never met her before. “Please let me offer my condolences on
the death of your father. Stormwind and the Alliance lost a truly great
man. Your family has always been so kind to mine, and I regret that I
wasn’t able to pay my respects.”
“Thank you,” Anduin said. He was trying and failing to place her.
“You’ll have to pardon me, but…have we met?”
The woman smiled a little sadly. “No, we’ve not,” she said, “but
you’ve probably seen a family resemblance in some portraits. You
see…I’m Calia Menethil. Arthas was my brother.”
C
alia Menethil. Hers was another name straight out of the history
books. Calia, like the archbishop, had been thought lost. The older
sister of the ill-fated Arthas Menethil, she was believed to have
perished on the day when the heir to Lordaeron, who was by then a
servant of the terrifying Lich King, had marched into the throne room,
murdered his father in cold blood, and unleashed the undead Scourge
upon the city. But his sister had survived, and she was here in the
Netherlight Temple. The Light had found her.
Moved in a way he couldn’t quite describe, Anduin closed the
distance between him and Calia in three quick, long-legged strides and
extended his hand mutely.
Calia hesitated, then took it. Anduin squeezed her hand and smiled.
“I am gladder than I can say to find you still alive, my lady. After so
long with no word, we assumed the worst.”
“Thank you. There were moments, I assure you, when I thought the
worst was upon me.”
“What happened?”
“It is…a long story,” she said, clearly unwilling to share it.
“And we have no time for a long tale this day.” It was Velen. Anduin
was filled with questions for both the archbishop and the queen of
Lordaeron, for such, now, she was. But Velen was completely right.
Despite the pleasant shocks he’d received in the last few moments,
Anduin, Moira, and Velen were here with a grim purpose.
He smiled at Calia and, releasing her hand, turned to regard the
assembled priests.
There were so many. As if reading his mind, Faol said, “It seems like
a lot of us, doesn’t it? But this is only a handful compared to the
numbers we could have. There is plenty of room for all of us.”
Anduin couldn’t even wrap his mind around it. “What an amazing
thing you’ve achieved here,” he said to Faol. “All of you. I knew you
were working toward this, but to truly see it with my own eyes is
something else again. I wish this were nothing more than a visit to a
place I’ve longed to behold, but we have received some dire news.”
He nodded to Moira. She was the daughter of Magni, “the Speaker,”
who had brought the warning to them. She was also well known and
well regarded here, whereas he was a newcomer—a king, to be sure,
but in a place where that was not seen as the highest authority. The
dwarf queen squared her shoulders and addressed the group.
“We’re servants of the Light, but we live on Azeroth,” she said. “And
my father has now become the Speaker for our world. He came to
Ironforge, where the Prophet and the king of Stormwind were visiting,
with terrible news.”
Her blunt, steady speech faltered slightly. And for a moment Anduin
saw in her the face of the girl she had once been, lost and uncertain.
She recovered quickly, though, and continued.
“Lads, lasses…our world’s hurt badly. She’s in trouble. In horrible
pain. My father told us that she needs healing; she can’t do it by
herself.”
Soft gasps rippled through the assembled crowd of priests.
“It is that monstrous sword!” a tauren rumbled, his deep voice
reminding Anduin sharply of Baine Bloodhoof, the tauren high
chieftain—and his friend.
“How can we possibly heal the world itself?” a draenei said, a note of
despair making her melodious voice crack.
It was a valid question. How indeed? Priests healed, but their
patients were flesh. They mended wounds, cured illnesses and curses,
and sometimes, if the Light willed, brought the dead back to life. What
could they do with a wound to the world?
He knew where they could start. He could feel the answer inside his
coat, next to his heart, where he had placed the small, precious piece
of Azerite. For a moment he hesitated, looking at the Forsaken, troll,
and tauren faces turned toward them. Horde faces. Could they be
trusted?
He asked the question of the Light—and his own body.
Anduin had been gravely injured when Garrosh Hellscream had
caused an enormous artifact known as the Divine Bell to come
crashing down upon him in Pandaria. Since that moment, his bones
ached whenever he was on the wrong path—when he was being cruel,
or thoughtless, or courting danger.
There was no ache in his body now. Indeed, he felt better than he
had in a long time. Was it the Netherlight Temple or the piece of
Azerite that placed this calm upon him?
He did not know. But he knew that both were benevolent influences.
Besides, Azeroth herself had asked for their aid.
Anduin stepped forward, lifting his hands for silence as the crowd
began to grow increasingly anxious. “Brothers and sisters, listen to me,
please!”
They quieted, their oh so different faces turned to him with
exquisite, beautifully similar expressions of concern and a desire to
help. And so he trusted them, these priests whose people owed
allegiance to the Horde. He let them hold the Azerite, watching their
reactions.
“Magni was once a dwarf, the father of a priestess,” Anduin said as
each of them held the small item. “It makes sense that he would turn
first to our order. I feel certain that there is something we ourselves
can do at some point, but first we’ll need to do research. Ask questions.
And in the meantime, we need to reach out to other types of healers.
Shaman. Druids. Those who have closer ties to the earth and its living
things than we do.”
Anduin paused, looking around at the great hall. He wondered what
the druidic equivalent looked like, or the shamanic. No doubt beautiful
and perfectly right for them, as this temple was for the Conclave.
“I will be traveling to Teldrassil myself very shortly.” He corrected
himself. “No. Not shortly—on the morrow.” He wished he had been
able to spend more time in Ironforge. He had wanted to meet with
Mekkatorque and his people and thank them for their contribution of
gnomish brains and gnomish technology that had helped turn back an
enemy so dire that there had been true doubt they would ever succeed.
But events had overtaken them all. Mekkatorque would understand.
“You have been out in the world, finding your fellow priests,” the
king of Stormwind continued. “Now we need to broaden that
outstretched hand of aid. We need to extend it to those who have a
better chance of helping right away. This will not be easy. So I would
ask the Horde and Alliance members present to seek out the druids
and shaman on their own sides.”
They began nodding, calmer now, and Anduin realized what he had
just done. He had come, an invited guest, into this hall and had
assumed he had the right to instruct members of the Conclave on their
next actions.
Chagrined, he turned to Faol.
“My apologies, Archbishop. These are your people.”
“They are people who serve the Light,” the undead priest reminded
him. “As are you.” His head cocked to one side, and he smiled slightly.
“You remind me of Calia’s brother when he was younger, when he still
followed the Light. You have a gift for ruling, my young friend. People
will follow where you lead them.”
Anduin understood that the comparison was meant as a
compliment. He had heard it before, most memorably from Garrosh
Hellscream.
While the former warchief of the Horde had been imprisoned below
the Temple of the White Tiger during his trial, he had asked for
Anduin to visit him. Garrosh had brought up the specter of the man
who had become the Lich King. There was another golden-haired,
beloved human prince once. He was a paladin, and yet he turned his
back on the Light.
Not an unexpected comparison at all, given their outward
similarities, yet it was an uncomfortable one. Anduin found he glanced
at Calia, who was smiling in agreement, nostalgia sharpening the
premature lines on her face. Not even Jaina could smile when thinking
of Arthas. No one could except the few left who remembered Arthas
Menethil as an innocent child.
“Thank you,” Anduin told Faol. “But I shan’t insert myself again
unless invited to do so. I respect the Conclave and its leadership.”
Faol shrugged. A tiny piece of mummified skin fell off and wafted to
the floor at the gesture. It should have been repellent, but Anduin
found himself regarding it in much the same way as he would a feather
falling from a trimmed cape. He was learning to see the person, not
the body.
In a way, we are all trapped in a shell, he thought. Theirs is just
held together dif erently.
“All voices are listened to here,” Faol said. “Even the youngest
acolyte may have something useful to say. Your voice is welcome here
too, King Anduin Wrynn. As is your presence.”
“I would like to return soon,” Anduin said. He looked at Calia and
Faol. “There is much I see here that I think I can learn from.”
And much, he thought but did not say, I need to learn about. An
idea was beginning to form, daring and audacious and unexpected. He
would have to speak with Shaw.
Faol chuckled, a raspy but not unpleasant sound. “Admitting you do
not know something is the beginning of wisdom. Of course. Any time…
priest.”
He inclined his head. Anduin looked at Moira and Velen. “I must
return to Stormwind shortly and prepare for my trip. It has a fresh
urgency.” He handed Moira the Azerite sample. “Would you please
deliver this to Mekkatorque for me? Tell him I’m sorry I can’t deliver it
in person.”
“Aye,” Moira said. “I’ll share anything he learns, of course. My father
will no doubt have some suggestions for us as well.”
“I’m certain he will,” Anduin said. The import of the task settled
again upon his heart and mind, chasing away the peace of this place
and his curiosity about Calia…and about the Forsaken.
When he was feeling restless, Kalecgos, the former blue Dragon
Aspect and present member of the Kirin Tor’s Council of Six,
liked to walk through the streets of his adopted city. He addressed,
reliably and responsibly, the concerns and troubles for the daylight
hours—when he needed to be present to help tackle a thorny problem
or suggest ancient methods that the current council might not have
investigated. In the evenings, though, his concerns and troubles were
his own.
Dragons often took on the forms of members of the younger races.
Alexstrasza the Life-Binder appeared as a high elf. Chronormu, one of
the most important of the time-warding bronze dragons, favored the
guise of a gnome known as “Chromie.” Kalecgos had long ago settled
upon the face and body of a half-human, half-elf male. He’d never
been sure why. Certainly not because it allowed him to pass unnoticed:
there weren’t a lot of half-elves running around.
He had decided that the form appealed to him because it
represented a melding of two worlds. Because he, “Kalec,” also felt that
he was a blend of two worlds: that of dragon and that of human.
Kalec had always felt drawn to and protective of the younger races.
Like the great red dragon Korialstrasz, who had given his life to save
others, he liked humans. And unlike Korialstrasz, who until his last
breath had been loyal only to his adored Alexstrasza, Kalec had loved
humans.
Two, in fact. Two strong, kind, and brave women. Loved and lost
them both. Anveena Teague—who in the end realized she was not a
true human at all—had sacrificed herself so that a monstrous,
devastatingly powerful demon would be denied entry into Azeroth.
And Lady Jaina Proudmoore—she was gone, too, sinking ever deeper
into a dark pit of pain and hatred that he feared would consume her.
She used to join him on these rambles. They would walk together,
hand in hand, often to pause and watch Windle Sparkshine light
Dalaran’s lamps at nine o’clock sharp. Windle’s daughter, Kinndy, had
been Jaina’s apprentice and was one of the many casualties of Garrosh
Hellscream’s attack. No, Kalec thought, call it what it was:
destruction of Theramore. Windle had gotten permission to nightly
create a memorial to his little girl; her image, drawn in magical golden
light, appeared when Windle used his wand to light each lamp.
But Jaina had left, wrapped in anger and frustration as if in a cloak.
Left the organization of magi known as the Kirin Tor and her position
as its leader; left him, too, with only a few angry words spoken
between them. She had been pushed farther than she could bear, and
now she was gone.
Kalec could have followed her, could have forced her to confront
him, demanded an explanation as to why she had left so abruptly. But
he didn’t. He loved her, and he respected her. And although every day
that passed made it less and less likely that she would return, he still
held out hope.
In the meantime, he had been appointed to fill the vacancy left by
Jaina’s exodus, and the Kirin Tor had been busy indeed during the war
against the Legion. He had a purpose. He had friends. He was making
his way in the world.
He had thought about visiting his good friend, Kirygosa, who had
quietly taken up residence in Stranglethorn. After a life spent in a part
of the world that knew mostly winter, Kiry was enjoying a permanent
summer. It might be nice to join her for a while. But somehow he
never did. If Jaina was ever to seek him out, it would be here. And so
he stayed.
Tonight, his feet brought him to the statue of one of Dalaran’s
greatest magi, Antonidas, who had been Jaina’s tutor. It had been she
who had commissioned the statue, which hovered a few feet off the
green grass thanks to a spell. And it had been she who had written the
inscription:
ARCHMAGE ANTONIDAS, GRAND MAGUS OF THE KIRIN TOR
THE GREAT CITY OF DALARAN STANDS ONCE AGAIN—
A TESTAMENT TO THE TENACITY AND WILL
OF ITS GREATEST SON.
YOUR SACRIFICES WILL NOT HAVE
BEEN IN VAIN, DEAREST FRIEND.
WITH LOVE AND HONOR, JAINA PROUDMOORE
It was here that he and Jaina once had a terrible argument.
Devastated by the brutal obliteration of her city, Jaina had desired
vengeance. When the Kirin Tor would not help her strike against the
Horde, she had turned to him. Her words, first pleading, then scathing
in their hurt-fueled anger, lingered with him still.
You once said you would fight for me—for the lady of Theramore.
Theramore’s gone. But I’m still here. Help me. Please. We have to
destroy the Horde.
He had refused her. This implacable…well, hatred—it’s not you.
You’re wrong. This is me. This is who the Horde made me.
In so many ways, Jaina was as much a casualty of Theramore as
Kinndy was. It had been the Kirin Tor’s decision to again allow
members of the Horde among their number. Azeroth was too
vulnerable to the Legion to turn down aid out of fear and hatred. Kalec
had wanted to speak with Jaina, but she had disappeared without a
word.
And then—his skin prickled, and a sudden knowing filled his brain.
Lady Jaina Proudmoore had returned to Dalaran. He sensed her,
and she was right—
“I thought I might find you here,” came a soft voice behind him.
His heart leaping, Kalec swung around.
She was every bit as beautiful as he remembered as she slipped off
the hood of her cloak. Moonlight shone upon her white hair with its
single golden streak, and it looked like she was crowned with luminous
silver. She wore it differently, in a braid this time. Her face was pale,
her eyes pools of shadow.
“Jaina,” Kalec breathed. “I—I’m so glad you’re all right. It’s so good
to see you.”
“Rumor has it you’re now a member of the council.” She was smiling
as she said it. “Congratulations.”
“Rumor is correct, and thank you,” Kalec replied. “Though I’d vacate
it more than happily…if you are back to stay.”
The smile faded, turned sad. “No.”
He nodded. It was what he had feared, and his heart hurt, but it
would do no good to say that. She knew.
“Where will you go?” he said instead.
The light was bright enough to catch the little furrow between her
brows that was so uniquely hers. It affected Kalec even more than the
smile had.
“I don’t know, actually. But I don’t belong here anymore.” Her voice
sharpened slightly with anger. “I can’t agree with what—” She caught
herself and took a deep breath. “Well. I don’t agree.”
This is who the Horde made me.
They gazed at each other for a long moment. Then, to Kalec’s
surprise, Jaina stepped forward and took his hands in hers. The touch,
so sweetly familiar, moved him even more than he expected it to. “You
were right about something. I wanted you to know that.”
“What?” he asked, trying to keep his voice steady.
“About how dangerous, how damaging, hate is. I don’t like what it’s
done to me, but I don’t know that I can change it now. I know what I’m
against. I know what angers me. What I hate. What I don’t want. But I
don’t know what calms me, or what I love, or what I do want.” Her
voice was pitched softly, but it trembled with emotion. Kalec gripped
her hands tightly.
“Everything I’ve felt or done since Theramore has been a reaction
against something. I feel…I feel like I’m in a pit and every time I try to
climb out of it, I just tumble back down.”
“I know,” Kalec said gently. Her hands were so warm in his. He
didn’t want to ever let go. “I’ve watched you struggle so hard for so
long. And I couldn’t help.”
“No one could,” Jaina said. “This is something I have to do for
myself.”
He looked down, running his thumb over her fingers. “I know that,
too.”
“I’m not leaving because of the vote.”
Kalec, surprised, glanced up sharply at that. “You’re not?”
“No. Not this time. People must be true to their own natures, as
must I.” She laughed softly, self-deprecatingly. “I just…have to figure
out what that is.”
“You will. And I believe it won’t be anything ugly or cruel.”
She eyed him. “I’m not sure I believe that.”
“I do. And…I admire you. For having the courage to face this.”
“I knew you’d understand. You always have.”
“Peace is a noble goal for the world,” Kalec said, “but it is also a
noble goal for oneself.” He realized he was smiling despite the ache in
his human-shaped chest. “You’ll find your way, Jaina Proudmoore. I
have faith in you.”
She said wryly, “You may be the only person in the world who does.”
He lifted her hands and pressed a kiss on each of them. “Travel
safely, my lady. And never forget: if you have need of me, I will be
there.”
She looked up at him for a moment, stepping closer. Now he could
see her eyes catching the moonlight. He had missed her. Would miss
her. He had a terrible feeling they wouldn’t see each other again, and
he hoped he was wrong.
Jaina let go of his hands, but only to bring hers up to cup his face.
She stood on her toes as he bent. Their lips met—so familiar, so sweet,
in a kiss so tender that it shook Kalec to his core. Jaina…
He wanted to kiss her forever. But all too soon, that precious
warmth pulled back. He swallowed hard.
“Good-bye, Kalec,” she whispered, and now he saw tears glistening
in her eyes.
“Farewell, Jaina. I hope you find what you seek.”
She gave him a tremulous smile, then retreated a few paces. Magic
swirled as she conjured a portal. She stepped into it and was gone.
Farewell, beloved.
Kalec stood for a long time, his only company the statue of the great
archmage.
T
he Ironforge trip had been cut short, and Wyll had been running
himself ragged trying to get everything together in time for the
next leg of Anduin’s journey. Anduin had, after much effort, managed
to persuade Wyll to stay in Stormwind and have some well-deserved
rest.
Once Wyll had retired, Anduin reached for the candelabra on the
dressing table. He lit one of its three candles and placed it in the
window before heading to the dining room for a very late supper.
Tonight, as on certain previous occasions, the candelabra had a
purpose other than providing illumination.
As Anduin eyed the roasted chicken, vegetables, and crisp Dalaran
apples he had no appetite. The news from Shaw and Magni was too
unsettling. He would have left for Teldrassil immediately, but it had
taken this long to get everything prepared. First light couldn’t come
soon enough for him.
“Eat something,” came a gruff voice. “Even priests and kings need to
eat.”
Anduin clapped a hand to his forehead. “Genn,” he said, “I’m so
sorry. Please, join me. We still have things to settle before I leave,
don’t we?”
“First thing is food,” Greymane said, and he pulled up a chair and
speared some chicken.
“You and Wyll are colluding against me,” Anduin sighed. “The sad
thing is, I’m glad of it.”
Genn grunted in amusement as Anduin filled his own plate. “I’ve got
the papers drawn up,” Genn said.
“Thank you for handling that. I’ll sign them right away.”
“Read them first. Doesn’t matter who wrote it. There’s a free piece of
advice for you.”
Anduin smiled tiredly. “You’ve given me quite a bit of free advice.”
“And some you’re even grateful for, I imagine,” Genn said.
“All of it. Even what I disagree with and choose to ignore.”
“Ah, now there speaks a wise king.” Greymane reached for the bottle
of wine on the table and filled his glass.
“No coup planned, then?” Anduin found himself reaching for
another helping of chicken. His body was hungry, it would seem, even
if his mind was distracted.
“Not this visit.”
“That’s good. Save your plotting efforts for another time.”
“There is one thing I’d like to discuss before you depart,” Greymane
said, turning serious. There was something in his body language that
alerted Anduin, who put down his knife and fork and regarded the
other king.
“Of course,” Anduin said, concerned.
Now that he had the full attention of the king of Stormwind, Genn
looked a bit uncomfortable. He took a drink of the wine, then faced
Anduin squarely.
“You honor me with your trust,” he said. “And I’ll do everything I
can to govern your people with care and diligence if, Light forbid,
something should happen to you.”
“I know you will,” Anduin assured him.
“But I’m an old man. I won’t be around forever.”
Anduin sighed. He knew where this was heading. “It’s been a long
and challenging day. I’m too tired to have this discussion with you.”
“You’ve always been too something or other every time I’ve brought
it up,” Genn pointed out. Anduin knew it was true. He toyed with his
food. “We’re on the eve of your departure to visit several different
lands,” Greymane continued. “Fresh dangers are cropping up. When
will be a good time? Because I don’t relish the thought of trying to sort
through gaggles of nobility each pushing their best claim forward.”
The image made Anduin smile in spite of himself, but it faded at
Genn’s next words.
“This isn’t a game. If the wrong person is given the kingdom,
Stormwind could find itself looking at a very dire situation indeed.
Your mother was a horrible casualty of an angry mob furious at what
the nobility was doing to the people. And you are old enough to
remember how unstable things were when your father went missing.”
Anduin was. He’d been the nominal king during his father’s
disappearance, but he’d had Bolvar Fordragon standing by his side to
offer advice. Varian had gone missing, and the black dragon Onyxia
had replaced him with an impostor, ruling the kingdom through that
puppet. Stormwind was unsettled and tumultuous until Onyxia was
defeated and the real Varian Wrynn again sat upon the throne.
The young king took a sip of his wine. “I remember, Genn,” he said
quietly.
Genn gazed down at his half-eaten meal. “When I lost my boy,” he
said softly, his voice intense, “I lost a piece of my soul. I didn’t just love
Liam. I admired him. I respected him. He would have been a
tremendous king.”
Anduin listened.
“And when he fell—when that heartless, undead banshee killed him
with an arrow meant for me—so much died with him. I thought I
would never recover. And I didn’t…not completely. But I had my wife,
Mia. I had my daughter, Tess, every bit as strong and smart as her
brother.”
Anduin did not interrupt. Genn had never been so open with him
before. Now the Gilnean king lifted his blue eyes. In the candlelight,
they shimmered, and his voice was husky with emotion.
“I moved on. But I had a hole in my heart where he used to be. A
hole I tried to fill with my hatred for Sylvanas Windrunner.”
Gently, Anduin said, “That kind of hole can’t be filled with hate.”
“No. It can’t. But I met another young man who loved his people as
Liam did. Who believed in things that were good, and just, and true. I
found you, my boy. You’re not my Liam. You’re yourself. But I do
catch myself trying to guide you.”
“You can’t replace my father, and I know you know that,” Anduin
said, deeply moved by Genn’s words. “But you’re a king and a father
both. You understand being both. And it helps.”
Genn cleared his throat. Emotions were no stranger to him, Anduin
knew, but they were usually the hot, angry, violent ones. It was part of
the worgen curse, yes, but Anduin knew it was also an intrinsic part of
the man. Genn was not used to the softer emotions and almost always,
as he did now, chased them away.
“I’d be saying the same thing to Liam right now if he were here. Life
is too short. Too unpredictable. For anyone in this world, especially for
a king. If you love Stormwind, you need to make sure it’ll go into
hands that will care for it.”
He paused. Here it comes, Anduin thought.
“Anduin, is there anyone you’ve considered as a possible queen?
Someone to rule in your stead should you fall in battle, bear a child to
carry on the Wrynn bloodline?”
Anduin abruptly grew keenly interested in the food before him.
Genn sighed, but it came out as more of a growl. “Times of peace are
rare in this world. And they’re always too brief. You need to use this
time to at least start the search. If you’re traveling to all these places,
couldn’t you have a few formal dances, or theater visits, or
something?”
“Believe it or not, I understand I need to do that,” Anduin admitted.
Genn did not know about the small box with Queen Tiffin’s rings that
Anduin kept close, and the younger man wasn’t about to volunteer
that information. “And the answer is no, I’ve not met anyone yet that
I’ve felt that way about. There’s time. I’m only eighteen.”
“It’s not uncommon for royal betrothals to occur when the
participants are still in the cradle,” Genn pressed. “I’m a bit of a
stranger to Stormwind society, but surely there are others who could
compile a list.”
Genn meant well, Anduin knew. But he was weary and worried, and
his focus was on what to do with a wounded world, not on an arranged
marriage.
“Genn, I appreciate your concern,” he said, choosing his words with
care. “This is not an unimportant matter. I’ve told you I understand
that. But the idea of an arranged marriage—agreeing to spend my life
with someone I may not even know before making that commitment—
it’s abhorrent to me. Besides,” he added, “you didn’t have one.”
Genn scowled. “Just because it’s not a path I chose doesn’t mean it’s
not a sound one. I know it’s not the most romantic thing in the world,
but it doesn’t have to be some stranger. My daughter, Tess, is close to
your age. She would make—”
“Quite the protest were she here at this moment,” Anduin
interrupted. “From the little I’ve seen of her, it’s clear she’s a
remarkable woman. But she certainly has her own life, and I’m going
to take a wild guess and say that I don’t think queen of Stormwind is
high on her list of what she wants for it.”
Tess Greymane, a few years his senior, was by all accounts a strongwilled woman. There had been all kinds of rumors about her actions,
implying that she had taken a page or two from Mathias Shaw. He had
not asked Genn about it, and now that the man had put forth his
daughter as a potential queen, he wasn’t about to.
Genn’s white brows drew together in a frown. “Anduin—”
“We will revisit this topic, I promise. But for now, there’s another
argument I’d like to get into with you.”
Despite himself, Genn chuckled. “You know I’ll argue with you any
time, Your Majesty.”
“I do indeed,” Anduin said, “and especially about this. After Magni’s
visit, Moira, Velen, and I went to the Netherlight Temple. I don’t think
it would surprise you one whit to tell you that I found it to be…” He
shook his head. “Truthfully, words fail me. It was serene and beautiful,
and simply being there made me feel so peaceful. So focused.”
“The only surprise I have about your visit was how long it took you
to get there,” Genn said. “But then again, a king has little time for
serenity and peace.”
“While I was there, I met two people who surprised me,” he said. He
took a breath. Here we go, he thought. “One of them was Calia
Menethil.”
Genn stared. “Are you certain? Not an impostor?”
“She looks a great deal like her brother. And I trust the priests of the
temple have made sure her claim is true.”
“You place a lot of faith in the priests’ goodwill.”
Anduin smiled. “Yes, I do.”
“Well, out with it. What did you learn? How did she escape? Does
she still lay claim to the throne of Lordaeron, provided we can one day
evict those rotting squatters who currently defile it?”
Anduin smiled a bit ruefully. “I didn’t press. I’ll return and speak
with her later. I got the impression that it wasn’t a happy story.”
“Light knows it couldn’t be,” Genn said. “That poor family. What the
girl must have been through. Probably escaped those wretches by the
skin of her teeth. How she must despise the undead after that!”
“Actually, that’s the next thing I wanted to tell you.The Netherlight
Temple is a hall for Azeroth’s priests. All of its priests. Including
Horde.” He paused. “Including Forsaken.”
Anduin had braced himself for an angry bellow of protest. Instead,
Genn calmly put down his fork and spoke in a carefully controlled
voice.
“Anduin,” he said, “I understand that you always want to see the
best in people.”
“It’s not—”
Genn held up a hand. “Please, Your Majesty. Hear me out.”
Anduin frowned but nodded.
“It’s an admirable trait. Especially in a ruler. But a ruler must be
careful that he’s not played for a fool. I know you met and respected
Thrall. And I know you consider Baine a friend, and he has acted with
honor. Even your father negotiated with Lor’themar Theron and held
Vol’jin in high esteem. But the Forsaken are…different. They don’t feel
things like we do anymore. They’re…abominations.”
Anduin’s voice was mild. “A current leader of the Conclave is
Archbishop Faol.”
Genn swore and sprang to his feet. Silverware clattered to the floor.
“Impossible!” His face had flushed, and a vein stood out on his neck.
“That’s worse than an abomination. That’s blasphemy! How can you
tolerate this, Anduin? Doesn’t it sicken you?”
Anduin thought about the impish good humor the late Alonsus Faol
had displayed. The kindness, the concern. We are priests before all
else. And he was.
“No,” Anduin said, smiling. “Quite the opposite. Seeing them there,
in that place of Light…it gave me hope, Genn. The Forsaken aren’t
mindless Scourge. They’re people. They have free will. And yes, some
of them have been changed for the worse. Those have moved on in
their new existence with hate and fear. But not all of them. I saw
Forsaken priests speaking not only with tauren and trolls but with
dwarves and draenei. They remembered the good. Moira’s worked
with Faol for some time now, and—”
Genn swore. “Moira, too? I thought dwarves had sense! I’ve heard
enough.” He turned, about to stalk out of the room.
“No, you haven’t.” Anduin’s voice was soft but brooked no
disagreement. He held out a hand and indicated the chair the other
had vacated. “You’ll stay, and you’ll listen.”
Genn eyed him, surprised, then nodded in approval as he sat back
down, albeit with obvious reluctance. He took a deep breath.
“I will,” he said. “Though I won’t like it.”
Anduin leaned forward intently. “There’s an opportunity here if
we’re bold enough to take it. Sylvanas gave the Forsaken life. Of course
they follow her. But the Alliance turned away from them. All we had to
offer them were names—‘deaders,’ ‘rotters.’ We viewed them with fear.
Disgust. We couldn’t even fathom that they were people.”
“Were,” Genn said. “They were people. Once. They’re not any
longer.”
“We’ve chosen to see them that way.”
Genn tried another tactic. “All right.” He leaned back in his chair,
eyes narrowed. “Let’s say that you saw a few decent Forsaken, an
extremely small handful, all of whom happened to be priests. Have
you encountered any others like that?”
There was another Anduin recalled who had most definitely not
been a priest. At the trial of Garrosh Hellscream, the bronze dragons
had offered both the defense and the prosecution the ability to show
scenes of the past through an artifact known as the Vision of Time. In
one such vision, Anduin had witnessed a conversation between a
Forsaken and a blood elf in a tavern shortly before that tavern had
been destroyed by those too devoted to Hellscream.
The two soldiers had been against the violence and cruelty that
Garrosh had personified. And they had died for their beliefs. Oh, what
was the name…It began with an “F.” “Farley,” Anduin said. “Frandis
Farley.”
“Who?”
“A Forsaken captain who turned against Garrosh. He was outraged
by the violence of Theramore. He lived right here, in Stormwind, when
he was alive.”
Genn looked as though he couldn’t even comprehend what Anduin
had just said.
“Frandis Farley wasn’t a priest. Just a soldier who still had enough
humanity left in him to understand evil when he saw it.” The more
Anduin worked it out, the more certain he became.
“Anomalies,” Greymane said.
“I don’t accept that,” Anduin said, leaning forward. “We have no
idea what the average citizen of the Undercity thinks or feels. And one
thing you cannot argue with me: Sylvanas cares about her people.
They matter to her. And that may be something we can use to our
advantage.”
“To bring her down?”
“To bring her to the negotiating table.” The two men regarded each
other, Anduin calm and focused, Genn struggling to suppress his
anger.
“Her goal is to turn more of us into more of them,” Genn said.
“Her goal is to protect her people,” Anduin insisted. “If we let her
know we understand that motivation, if we can assure her that those
who already exist would never be in danger from the Alliance, she’s
going to be a lot less likely to use Azerite to create weapons to kill us.
Even better, we might actually be able to work with the Horde to save
a world we both have to live in.”
Genn looked at him for a long moment. “You sure you didn’t catch
something in Ironforge?”
Anduin held up a placating hand. “I know it sounds like madness.
But we’ve never tried to understand the Forsaken. Now could be the
perfect chance. Archbishop Faol and the others could help open
negotiations. Each side has something the other just might want.”
“What do we have that the Forsaken want? And what do the
Forsaken have that we could possibly want?”
Anduin smiled, gently. His heart was full as he answered, “Family.”
—
His quarters were dark as he entered them, illuminated only by the
light of the moons. “You got my message,” Anduin said aloud as he lit
a single candle and looked around.
The room appeared empty, but of course it wasn’t. A shadow that
had seemed perfectly ordinary a moment earlier shimmered, and a
familiar lithe frame stepped into the faint light.
“I always do,” said Valeera Sanguinar.
“One of these days I’m going to ask you to show me how you get in.”
She smiled. “I think you might be a little too heavy to manage it.”
Anduin chuckled. He counted himself fortunate that there were
many people he trusted. Not all kings, he knew, could say the same
thing. But Valeera was on an entirely different level from even Velen or
Genn Greymane. She and Varian had fought alongside each other in
the gladiator pits, and Anduin had met her years ago. She had saved
both his and his father’s lives on more than one occasion and had
pledged her loyalty to the Wrynn line. And what was almost as
important was that she was able to move in circles denied to Anduin
and his advisers.
Valeera was a blood elf, and she was the king’s personal spy.
She had served Varian in that capacity during his reign, and she had
aided the prince when he needed messages delivered that he asked be
kept secret even from his father. Although he trusted Spymaster Shaw
to do what was best for the kingdom, Anduin didn’t know the man well
enough to trust that he would do what was best for the king. Certainly
he would not have approved of the correspondence Anduin had been
carrying on for the last few years.
“I assume you know about Azerite,” he said.
Valeera nodded her golden head, perching on a chair without
waiting to be asked. “I do,” she said. “I hear it can build kingdoms,
bring them down, and possibly doom the world.”
“All that is true,” Anduin confirmed. He poured them each a cup of
wine and handed one to her. “I’ve never embraced the idea that Horde
and Alliance must always be against each other. And it seems to me
that now, more than ever, we have to have cooperation and trust on
both sides. This new material…” He shook his head. “Far too
dangerous in the hands of any enemy. And the best way to defeat an
enemy is to make them a friend.”
The blood elf sipped her wine. “I serve you, King Anduin. I believe in
you. And I am most certainly your friend and always will be. I would
like to live in this world that you see. But I don’t think it’s possible.”
“Improbable,” Anduin said, “but I do think it’s possible. And you
know better than anyone that I’m not alone in that sentiment.”
He handed her a letter. It was written in a personal code understood
by only a handful of individuals. Valeera took it and read. Her
expression soured, but she nodded as she carefully tucked it into a
pocket close to her heart. As always, she would memorize the contents
in case the letter was lost or destroyed.
“I will see that his surrogate receives it,” Valeera promised. She did
not look happy.
“Be careful,” she added. “No one will support this. It’s doomed to
failure.”
“But what if it works?” Anduin pressed.
Valeera peered into the ruby depths of her cup, then lifted her
glowing eyes to his. “Then,” she said slowly and with deep reluctance,
“I think I might have to stop using the word ‘impossible.’ ”
S
ylvanas Windrunner reclined on a tanned hide in the large tepee
on Spirit Rise. Nathanos sat beside her. He looked uncomfortable
sitting cross-legged on the ground, but if she was not allowed to sit in a
chair or stand, she wouldn’t let him do it, either. A blood elf mage,
Arandis Sunfire, had accompanied her as well so that she could make a
quick exit if things grew too dull or if an emergency called her away.
He stood stiffly to the left of the pair, looking as if he wished he were
anywhere but here. On Sylvanas’s right was one of her rangers,
Cyndia, whose perfect stillness made Arandis’s rigidity look energetic.
Sylvanas leaned over to Nathanos and whispered in his ear, “I am so
weary of drums.” To her, it was the unifying sound of the “old
Horde”—the orcs, the trolls, and the tauren, of course, seemed to be
willing to happily bang on the drums at any time. Now, at least, they
were not the thuddingly loud war drums of the orcs but soft, steady
drumming as Archdruid Hamuul Runetotem droned on about the
“tragedy of Silithus.”
As far as Sylvanas was concerned, what had happened wasn’t really
tragic at all. In her opinion, a crazed titan plunging a sword into the
world had been a gift. She was keeping Gallywix’s discovery quiet until
she was certain about how the peculiar material could be properly
utilized for maximum benefit to the Horde. Gallywix had told her he
had “people on that, too.”
Also, what was in Silithus, really, but giant bugs and Twilight
cultists, both of which the world was better without? But the tauren in
particular, whose people had given the Horde its original druids and
who had lost several members of the Cenarion Circle, had been
devastated at the loss of life.
Sylvanas had graciously sat through a ritual to honor and soothe
their troubled spirits. And now she was listening to—and expected to
approve—plans to send more shaman and druids to Silithus to
investigate, all because Hamuul Runetotem had had a terrible dream.
“The spirits cry out,” Hamuul was saying. “They died in an effort to
protect the land, and now only death inhabits that place. Death and
pain. We must not fail our Earth Mother. We must re-create the
Cenarion Hold.”
Baine was watching her closely. Some days she wished he would just
follow his big, bleeding heart and turn the tauren to the Alliance. But
her disdain for the tauren’s gentleness did not eclipse her need of
them. As long as Baine remained loyal—and thus far he was, where it
counted—she would use him and his people to the Horde’s advantage.
With Baine was a troll representative, the elderly Master Gadrin.
The warchief wasn’t looking forward to that conversation, either.
There was a power vacuum in the troll hierarchy right now, and the
trolls were a chaotic people. Only now, belatedly, had she realized just
how calm and centered an individual Vol’jin had been. Certainly, she
hadn’t realized how effortless he made leading the Horde appear. The
trolls would demand a visit, too, no doubt, so they could put forth their
various suggestions for a leader.
Runetotem had finished his appeal. They were all looking at her
now, all those furry, horned heads turned in her direction.
As she was pondering her answer, one of Baine’s Longwalkers,
Perith Stormhoof, arrived. He was panting heavily as he bent and
whispered into his high chieftain’s ear. Baine’s eyes widened slightly,
and his tail swished. He asked a question in Taur-ahe, to which the
runner nodded. Everyone’s attention was now on the tauren leader.
Solemn-visaged, he rose to speak. “I have just been informed that
we will soon be having a guest. He wishes to speak with you, Warchief,
of what has happened in Silithus.”
Sylvanas tensed slightly but was outwardly calm. “Who is this
visitor?”
Baine was quiet for a moment, then replied, “Magni Bronzebeard.
The Speaker for Azeroth. He asks that you send a mage; he is too
heavy for the lift to bear him safely.”
Everyone started talking at once except for Sylvanas. She and
Nathanos exchanged glances. Her mind was racing a thousand leagues
a second. Magni couldn’t have anything to say that she would
appreciate hearing. He was the world’s champion, and right now, the
deep fissures in that world were yielding a spectacular treasure. She
had to stop this, but how?
All she could do, she realized, was try to minimize the damage. “I
know that Magni Bronzebeard is no longer truly a dwarf,” she said.
“But he once was. And I know that to you, High Chieftain, the thought
of formally hosting a former leader of an Alliance race must be
awkward, if not outright repellent. I will relieve you of the decision
whether to welcome him. I am the warchief of the Horde. Anything he
has to say, he can say to me alone.”
Baine’s nostrils flared. “I would think that you of all people would
understand how a physical transformation can change one’s views,
Warchief. You once were a member of the Alliance. Now you lead the
Horde. Magni is no longer even flesh.”
It was not an insult in any way, yet somehow it stung. But she could
not counter the logic. “Very well. If you think it is safe, High
Chieftain.”
The tauren and the trolls continued looking at her, and it took her a
moment to realize that they were expecting her to offer the use of her
mage. She pressed her lips together for a moment, then turned to
Arandis. “Will you accompany Perith to where the Speaker is awaiting
us?”
“Of course, Warchief,” he said promptly. In the awkward minutes
before all heard the hum of the portal, Sylvanas’s brain was working
on how best to handle the imminent conversation.
When Magni appeared, the myriad facets of his diamond body
reflecting the firelight, Baine greeted him warmly.
“We are honored by your presence, Speaker.”
“Yes, we are,” Sylvanas said immediately. “I am told you asked to see
me.”
Magni nodded at Baine, accepting the welcome, before he squared
his shoulders as he faced Sylvanas. He stabbed a diamond forefinger
in her direction. “I did,” he said, “an’ there’s much tae say. First, ye’ve
got tae get rid o’ yer little green men. They’re just makin’ a bad thing
worse.”
Sylvanas had expected that. “They are investigating the area,” she
said, keeping her voice calm and mild.
“Nae, they’re not. They’re pokin’ and proddin’, and Azeroth doesn’t
like it. She needs tae heal—or she’s goin’ tae die.”
All present listened intently as the Speaker explained that Azeroth
was in agony, racked by pain that was slowly destroying her. Her very
essence was seeping to the surface, and this essence was powerful
beyond imagining.
The last part, Sylvanas already knew. The first was troubling. “We’ve
got tae help ’er,” Magni said, his voice ragged, and this time she did
not correct him.
“Of course we must,” she said. This revelation could undo
everything. “I assume you will speak to the Alliance.”
“Already done,” Magni said, clearly hoping to reassure her. “Young
Anduin and th’ Explorers’ League, th’ Cenarion Circle, and th’ Earthen
Ring are goin’ tae be sending out teams tae Silithus soon.” The Magni
Bronzebeard who once had ruled Ironforge would never have revealed
what this Speaker of Azeroth just had. This was valuable information.
“Good,” said Baine. “We stand ready to do the same.”
He should not have spoken before his warchief, but Sylvanas was
starting to get an idea.
“High Chieftain Baine speaks for us all. What you have shared is
grave news indeed, Speaker. Of course, we will do what we can to help.
In fact,” she continued, “I would like to ask the tauren to organize the
Horde response.”
Baine blinked twice but otherwise gave no indication of how
surprised he doubtless was. “It will be an honor,” he said, and brought
his fist to his heart in a salute.
“Thank you for your warning, Speaker. We all exist on this precious
world. And as recent events have brought home to all of us, there are
not many places left for us to flee to should we destroy this one,”
Sylvanas said.
“That’s…mighty enlightened o’ ye,” Magni allowed. “Right, then. Me
task is far from over. I know th’ members o’ the Horde and the
Alliance both have trouble imaginin’ that they aren’t the only people in
the world. But there are many other races I must warn. As ye say,
Warchief, we all exist on this precious world. Call off yer goblins. Or
else we might be tryin’ tae find an entirely new world tae call home.”
Sylvanas did not promise she would, but she smiled. “Please let us
save you some time as you execute this task. Where may Arandis send
you next?”
“Desolace, I think,” Magni mused. “Need tae tell th’ centaur. Thank
ye, lassie.”
Sylvanas kept the pleasant smile on her face even as she seethed at
the too-familiar, condescending term. All were quiet as Arandis
conjured a portal that opened up onto the bare, ugly land, and Magni
stepped through it and vanished.
Hamuul sighed deeply. “It is worse even than I feared,” he said. “We
must begin work as soon as we can. High Chieftain, we need all those
who have worked with the Alliance before to—”
“No.”
The warchief’s voice cut off the conversation with the efficiency of a
blade lopping off a head.
“Warchief,” Baine said calmly, “we all heard the words of the
Speaker. Azeroth is badly wounded. Have we forgotten the lessons of
the Cataclysm already?”
Tails swished. Ears were lowered and flicked. The trolls looked
down and shook their heads. Oh, yes, they all remembered the
Cataclysm.
“Such a thing cannot be permitted to happen a second time.”
I should have done this a long time ago, Sylvanas thought. She rose
fluidly and went to the tauren leader. “I have words for your ears only,
High Chieftain,” she said, her voice a purr. “Walk with me.”
Baine’s ears flattened against his head for a moment, but he nodded
and descended the steps that led from the tepee to the rise.
The rises of Thunder Bluff—Spirit Rise, Elder Rise, and Hunter Rise
—were all connected to the center rise by rope bridges and planks.
Sylvanas marveled quietly at the engineering. They seemed so rickety
and precarious, yet they easily handled the weight of several tauren
crossing at a time.
Sylvanas walked without hesitation to the middle of the bridge. It
swayed slightly. From there she could see the faint glow of the cavern
that housed the Pools of Vision. Before she left, she would have to pay
a visit there; it was the only congregation of Forsaken in the tauren
capital. She needed to return home, to the Undercity, too; to meet with
the Desolate Council. To assess the threat—or lack thereof—for herself.
“What are these words you wish to share with me, Warchief?” Baine
asked.
“Are my people happy here?”
The tauren cocked his head in puzzlement. “I believe so,” he said.
“They have all that they ask for and seem content.”
“The tauren befriended the Forsaken when we were rejected by the
Alliance. For that I will always be grateful.”
Hamuul Runetotem, currently a thorn in her side, had argued
successfully that the Forsaken were capable of redeeming themselves.
With free will, they could choose to atone for what they had done after
being murdered and enslaved to the Lich King’s will. He had
convinced the warchief Thrall, who knew a thing or two about people
being seen as “monsters,” to admit the Forsaken into the Horde.
Sylvanas would never forget that. She turned to Baine now, looking
up at him. “And for that, I have looked the other way when you
pursued a friendship with a certain human.”
“My interaction with Jaina Proudmoore has long been known,”
Baine said. “It was made public knowledge at Garrosh Hellscream’s
trial. She aided me when the Grimtotem were in rebellion against the
tauren. Why does this trouble you now?”
“That doesn’t trouble me. What does trouble me is that you have
continued to exchange correspondence with Anduin Wrynn. Do you
deny it?”
He was silent, but his suddenly switching tail betrayed him. Tauren
were terrible liars. At last he spoke. “I have never, by word or
implication, advocated anything that would bring harm to the Horde.”
“I believe you. That is why I have not interfered ere now. But Prince
Anduin is now King Anduin. He’s no longer an ineffectual, starry-eyed
dreamer. He is the maker of policy. He can start a war. If you were me,
would you condone secret messages sent to an Alliance king?”
“What will you do?” Baine asked with remarkable calmness.
“Nothing,” she said, “as long as the connection is severed. And to
show I do not hold a grudge at what some could understandably label
treason, I stand by my offer to allow you to lead the response to help
heal Azeroth. In fact”—she gestured to the cavern entrance below them
—“I will speak with the Forsaken here and see if the Pools of Vision
can be of any assistance. I will leave my ranger Cyndia behind. She will
keep me advised of all developments.”
She turned back to Baine. He stood as still as if he were a statue of a
tauren. Even his tail had stopped twitching.
“Do we understand each other?”
“Perfectly, Warchief. Is that all?”
“It is. I hope this conversation marks the beginning of a new level of
cooperation between the tauren and the Forsaken.”
Baine followed her, a looming hulk of silence, as they returned to the
tepee. She informed those who were waiting there of her suggestion
that the Forsaken of the Pools of Vision work with the tauren as they
sought to heal the world. When Hamuul spoke of a new Cenarion Hold
in Silithus, one of the trolls spoke up.
“An’ what of da goblins? Dey be dere thick as flies,” the troll said.
“Ya gonna pull dem out like da Speaker said?”
“The goblins,” said Sylvanas, “know about the deep places of the
world better than any other members of the Horde. I have spoken with
Gallywix, and he assures me that they are exploring and investigating.”
When it appeared as though several were ready to object to this, she
forestalled them by saying, “He reports directly to me. And when I am
ready, I will share what I have learned with the Horde.”
“But not the Alliance?” Runetotem said.
Sylvanas very carefully did not look at Baine as she replied. “Magni
has already spoken to the Alliance. I am quite certain Anduin will not
be sending couriers to Orgrimmar with their latest discoveries. Why
should I?”
“Because this world belongs to all of us,” Runetotem said quietly.
Sylvanas smiled. “Perhaps one day soon, ‘all of us’ will mean
‘Horde.’ In the meantime, I put the interests and welfare of my people
before the Alliance who destroyed Taurajo. I suggest all of you do as
well.”
“But—” the archdruid began.
She turned to him, her face cold, composed, but her eyes hot, angry
fire. “Object again and I will not take it well. Vol’jin and his loa named
me the warchief of the Horde. And as warchief of the Horde, I decide
what is important to reveal—and when and to whom. Is that
understood?”
Hamuul’s ears flattened against his skull, but he spoke calmly
enough. “Yes, Warchief.”
THE UNDERCITY
Parqual Fintallas had been a historian when he still drew breath. He’d
known all there was to know about Lordaeron and remembered, with a
great deal of fondness, time spent with his wife, Mina, and his
daughter, Philia, in his modest but comfortable chambers in Capital
City. Even now, he could recall the smell of the ink and the parchment
as he scribbled notes from various musty old tomes, and the golden,
honey hue of the light that filtered in. The crackle of the fire, warm and
comforting as he worked late into the night by the light of candles.
Sometimes Mina would send in Philia to deliver his supper when he
was too engrossed to come to the table. He’d pull her onto his lap
when she was young and invite her to sit with him when she was older,
encouraging her to browse through the massive library while he
feasted on Mina’s excellent cooking.
But there was no crackling fire here in the Undercity, no smells of
parchment and ink and delicious food prepared with love by a warm
and wise lifemate. No child to pester him with questions he’d loved to
answer. Only coldness, dampness, the sickly smell of rot, and the eerie
green glow of the tainted river that flowed throughout the
subterranean necropolis.
Those memories were too fresh to be anything but painful, yet how
sweet they still were. The Forsaken were strongly discouraged from
revisiting places they had loved in life. Their home was no longer
Lordaeron but the Undercity, a place that, like the inhabitants who no
longer had need of sleep, didn’t distinguish between day and night.
Once or twice, Parqual had sneaked into his former lodgings,
smuggling books into the Undercity. But he had been caught once and
admonished. His books had been confiscated. There is no need to
remember the human history of this place, he had been told. Only the
history of the Undercity matters now.
Over the years, he’d made use of adventurers to acquire more books,
each one precious to him. But he could not use adventurers who
sought gold or fame to bring back what had gone. Mina was either
dead or a gibbering monstrosity. And Philia, his bright, beautiful girl,
was still human, possibly still alive. But even so, she would be
horrified at what had become of her beloved papa.
For the longest time, he had thought himself unique in his
wistfulness. But then Vellcinda had founded the Desolate Council to
take care of the city in the Dark Lady’s absence. What had begun
purely as necessity had, for Parqual at least, become something so
much more. It had given him a sense of camaraderie and the
knowledge that not everyone was content simply to serve without
questioning. The Forsaken might not be living, but they had needs,
desires, emotions that were not being met.
Vellcinda believed that Sylvanas would visit soon and would listen
to what the council had to say.
Parqual sincerely hoped she was right, but he had his doubts.
Sylvanas needed to stop forcing them to live again if they did not wish
to; she needed to allow them to embrace their former lives as well as
their undeath.
History taught that those who had power were generally loath to
relinquish any of it unless they were forced to do so.
And in all his years of life and undeath, Parqual had seldom found
history’s lessons to be wrong.
T
he capital of the night elves was one of Anduin’s favorite places,
though he had seldom been able to travel there. The kaldorei were
a beautiful people, and so was their city, nestled securely in the
embrace of the massive World Tree, Teldrassil.
Anduin stood now beside High Priestess Tyrande Whisperwind and
her beloved, the archdruid Malfurion Stormrage, in the Temple of the
Moon. Serenity enveloped this place as the tenders of the temple went
about their duties with grace and purpose. The rhythmic sound of
softly splashing water was soothing, and the statue of Haidene,
holding aloft the bowl from which the moonwell’s radiant liquid
flowed, was calming to behold.
His mind went back to the Netherlight Temple. The Light finds us,
he thought. All of us. It chooses the story, or the face, or the name, or
the song that resonates the most with each of us. We may call it
Elune, or An’she, or just the Light, but it doesn’t matter. We can turn
away from it if we desire, but it’s always there.
He caught Tyrande watching him, a slight smile curving her lips.
She understood.
“I regret that I have not been a more frequent visitor to your
beautiful city,” he said aloud.
“War by its nature conspires to keep us all from places that nurture
the spirit,” Tyrande said.
With a sigh, Anduin turned away from the statue and faced the pair
of leaders. “My letter outlined the nature of the current battle we face,”
he said. “A battle to heal our world. Has Magni come to you yet?”
“Not yet,” Malfurion said. “It is a wide world, and Speaker for it he
may be, but there is much ground to cover. We had already sent
members of the Cenarion Circle back to Silithus after…after the
tragedy. We wanted to assess the damage.”
We have eyes on it, Shaw had told him earlier.
“Not for the first time, and I’m certain not for the last, I am grateful
for the strong bonds between our peoples,” Anduin said. “What did the
Circle learn?”
The two exchanged a look. Then, “Come,” said Malfurion. “Let us
ride.”
Anduin walked with them through the springy grass of the temple
and out the arched doorway. Two Sentinels, the fierce female soldiers
who guarded the city, awaited them with three nightsabers.
“Do you know how to ride one?” Tyrande asked with a smile.
“I’ve ridden gryphons, hippogryphs, and horses,” Anduin said, “but
not a nightsaber.”
“They are similar to a gryphon, but with a smoother gait. I think you
will enjoy it.”
There was a spotted black one, one that had a soft gray coat, and a
white one with black stripes that reminded the young king of the great
White Tiger, Xuen, whom he had met in Pandaria. Too much so; he
felt it would be almost disrespectful to ride it. He opted for the gray
one, swinging himself into the saddle with ease. The big cat looked
back at him, grunted, and shook its head before settling into a
rhythmic lope that was as comfortable as Tyrande had promised.
“I believe it is as grim as the Speaker made it out to be,” Malfurion
said as the three made their way down the carpeted ramp and over the
white marble stone, heading away from the temple. He kept his voice
pitched softly. “Everyone in the Cenarion Hold and throughout the
region was killed at once.”
“I sent priestesses when I heard,” Tyrande said, and left it at that.
Anduin thought bleakly of the horrifying sight that must have greeted
the gentle Sisters of Elune. More than the world was wounded by
Sargeras. The only consolation was that the mad titan had, after so
long cutting a swath of destruction and torment throughout the
universe, finally been imprisoned.
“Our first thought was to send groups of druids and priestesses to
create moonwells,” Malfurion continued.
It made good sense. Moonwells contained sacred waters that could
heal wounds and restore energy and vitality, and they often were put
to use purifying corrupted areas. Or in this case, healing wounded
ones.
“Did you meet with success?” Anduin asked.
“It is too early to tell. Most of our groups have not even had an
opportunity to create one. The goblins are hard at work plundering
Azeroth,” Malfurion said, his normally pleasant, deep voice a rumble
of wounded anger. “And there is plenty for them to exploit. As Magni
told you, the essence of the world has come to the surface, and in great
supply. We ourselves found a vein.”
A vein. Anduin’s mind went immediately to the intricate network of
veins and arteries that went through a living body. Strange how so
long ago, well before anyone understood that Azeroth was a sleeping
nascent titan, the term “vein” had been used to describe the ribbons of
various minerals that ran throughout the world.
Malfurion turned his black-striped nightsaber to the right, heading
toward the Warrior’s Terrace. As they passed the citizens of
Darnassus, many turned to regard the sight of the young Stormwind
king, bowing and waving to him. Anduin smiled and returned the
waves, although the subject matter he was discussing with the
Darnassian onlookers’ leaders was a bleak one.
“We obtained some samples to study,” Malfurion continued. “It is…”
The archdruid, Anduin knew, was well over ten thousand years old.
Yet this substance left him at a loss for words. For a moment, the night
elf seemed almost overcome.
Riding closely beside and in perfect synchronization with her
husband, Tyrande reached out to him, squeezing his arm briefly in
silence.
Anduin regarded Malfurion with deep sympathy. “I have held it,” he
said quietly. “I know how it affected me. I cannot imagine how it must
have moved those so deeply connected to nature and the land.”
“I cannot deny the magnificence of it—or the power, for good or ill.
And Tyrande and I—all the kaldorei—will do everything we can to
prevent its misuse.”
The Warrior’s Terrace loomed up ahead. At the top, standing at
attention, a unit of five Sentinels awaited them. Their leader was an elf
with long dark blue hair pulled back in a ponytail. Her skin was pale
reddish-purple, and the traditional markings on her face looked like
claw marks. Like all her sisters, she was strong and lithe and fierce.
But unlike many of the Sentinels Anduin had met before, she did not
have a hardened expression. Tyrande slipped off her saber and greeted
the Sentinel warmly. Anduin and Malfurion, too, dismounted.
One hand on the Sentinel’s shoulder, Tyrande turned to her guest.
“King Anduin Wrynn,” she said, and Anduin realized that it would take
a long time for him to grow used to that title, “may I present Captain
Cordressa Briarbow.”
The captain turned to Anduin and inclined her head. “I am
honored,” she said.
“A pleasure, Captain,” Anduin said. “I remember you from the trial
in Pandaria.”
She smiled. “I am flattered you recall.”
“We have been in communication with the Explorers’ League,”
Tyrande said. “Ordinarily, they provide their own protection. But
given the state of Silithus at this moment, I have offered them the aid
of Cordressa’s unit.” Her eyes flashed. “Goblins are not to be trifled
with, and with them present in so many numbers, the area is
dangerous.”
“A wise decision,” Anduin said. “I am certain there will be several
expeditions. I will assign some of my units to protective duty as well.”
Anduin was no lover of war, but he knew that others thrived on
combat. This would allow them to utilize their training in a positive
way.
“Druids and shaman can take care of themselves,” Malfurion said,
“but the members of the Explorers’ League are generally
archaeologists and scientists. And right now they are doing precious
work.”
Their attention was drawn by a soft swirl of white a few feet away,
accompanied by the distinctive sound of a portal opening. A moment
later, a gnome, all eyebrows and mustache, stepped through. Gold
embroidery on his violet tabard depicted the all-seeing eye that was
the symbol of the Kirin Tor.
What did the most powerful magi in Azeroth want with Tyrande and
Malfurion? Anduin wondered. But when the gnome trundled directly
up to him, the king realized it wasn’t the leaders of Darnassus that the
Kirin Tor had come to see.
“Greetings, High Priestess, Archdruid,” the gnome said, nodding to
the much bigger night elves. “King Anduin, this message is for you.”
“Thank you.” Light, please let this not be more bad news. Our poor
world cannot handle it.
He broke the seal and read, feeling all eyes on him.
To Anduin Wrynn, King of Stormwind, Kalecgos of the
Kirin Tor gives greetings.
Your Majesty, I hope this finds you well. I understand
you embarked on a journey to thank your fellow Alliance
members for their role in winning a terrible war. It is
exactly the sort of thing I would expect of you, my friend,
and I hope it goes well.
Our Mutual Friend paid me an unexpected visit just
now. I believe we will not be seeing her again any time
soon. But I have faith that she will return, and her mind
will be the calmer and clearer for her retreat from this
world. It is dif icult to heal when a wound is constantly
being reopened.
I know nothing about where she will be, but I felt you
would wish to hear. —K
“Is all well, Your Majesty?” Malfurion asked quietly.
It was, overall, good news. At the same time, Anduin again regretted
that Jaina still seemed to be lost. He hoped, as Kalec did, that she
would find the answers, and the peace, she sought.
“Yes,” he said. “An update on a personal matter. Nothing dire.”
“Do you wish me to carry a response?” the gnome courier inquired.
“You may tell Kalecgos that I have received the message and I share
his hopes. Thank you.”
The gnome nodded. “Good day, then!” His small hands made
motions that Anduin could not quite follow, and the air before the
courier shimmered. Anduin caught a glimpse of the beautiful floating
city of Dalaran for just an instant, then the gnome stepped through the
portal. It faded behind him.
Anduin turned to Malfurion and Tyrande. “The letter concerned
Jaina,” he said. “She is safe, according to Kalecgos.”
“That is good news,” Tyrande said, “though it makes me wonder why
she did not choose to fight alongside us against the Legion after the
Broken Shore. Will she be returning?”
Anduin shook his head. “Not immediately, at any rate. Hopefully
one day.”
“And may that day be soon,” Malfurion said. “The world needs all
the champions it can find.”
“It does,” Anduin said slowly, thinking. His plan had been to
rendezvous with Velen at the Exodar. He had spent much time there a
few years earlier, and it was the closest thing he had to a second home.
He yearned to walk its crystalline halls once more and to speak with
the warm, friendly draenei.
But Velen already had enlightened the draenei about what Magni
had revealed in Ironforge. Down to the littlest one, they were all
probably hard at work already. The Exodar and Velen did not need
him right now. His task was to spread the news to others and spur
them on to action. And that was a task he could not do alone.
Anduin made a decision. He would not be traveling to the Exodar.
He would return to Stormwind briefly, and then he would travel to the
third place that, in his heart, he felt he could call home: the
Netherlight Temple.
I
t was very late when Anduin returned from Teldrassil. He used his
hearthstone to avoid disturbing anyone. Wyll had been asleep for
several hours, and Anduin didn’t feel like getting into discussions with
Genn Greymane just yet. There was, however, someone he did very
much wish to speak with, and he wanted to give her a chance to report
with news before he left for the Netherlight Temple.
He had materialized in the receiving room where he and his father
had shared so many meals, arguments, and discussions. A ghost of a
smile touched his lips, along with the ache of loss; then he turned and
went to his private quarters, lit a candle, and placed it in the window.
That task done, he tended to another one—filling his growling
stomach. After descending into the kitchen, quiet at this hour, he
heaped a plate with bread, Dalaran sharp, and goldenbark apples.
When Anduin returned to his chambers, he closed the door behind
him and said, “I’ll feel silly if I’m talking to myself.”
“You’re not.” Valeera was there. Anduin started to smile, then saw
the expression on her face. All at once, he lost his appetite.
“Something’s wrong,” he said. When she didn’t deny it, Anduin’s
heart sank. “Tell me.”
She closed her eyes, then mutely handed him a letter. For a
moment, Anduin didn’t want to read it. He wanted to stay in this place
of innocent ignorance. But that was not granted to a king, not one who
wanted to be a good leader of his people, at any rate.
He swallowed hard. “Is he safe?”
“For the moment.” Valeera jerked her head at the letter.
At least the worst hasn’t happened, Anduin thought. But he
suspected he knew what was in the letter now.
With a heavy heart, he unfolded the letter, which was written in the
agreed-upon code. He translated it as he read.
For years, I have cherished our friendship.
I cherish it still. But with great reluctance and
for the sake of those who look to me for protection,
I know the time has come when I must sever it.
Anduin’s stomach clenched. She knows. He continued reading.
I will not put my people nor you, friend, at
further risk.
I still believe that there will come a day when
we can speak openly, with the support of all our people.
But that day has not yet come.
Earth Mother watch over you.
Anduin had half expected this once Sylvanas had become leader of
the Horde. But even so, it felt like a physical blow. Ever since the day
he had accidentally materialized in the middle of a meeting between
Baine Bloodhoof and Jaina Proudmoore, he had liked the tauren
leader. Like Baine, Anduin had thought they were friends. But all at
once he was besieged by doubt.
Baine had expressed his sympathies about Varian’s death,
reminding Anduin that he, too, had lost a father. The initial reports
from Genn Greymane and others were that Sylvanas had betrayed
them, abandoning Varian and presumably every other member of the
Alliance, to die when she retreated with no warning from the Broken
Shore. Baine, who had been there, had told Anduin a different story.
Another wave of demons had appeared, he said, and Sylvanas reported
that a dying Vol’jin had ordered her to sound the retreat.
Had Baine lied to him?
No. Anduin’s heart was sore, but there was no warning of danger or
deceit from his once-shattered bones. Baine had told the truth as he
knew it. Yet no one but Sylvanas, it seemed, had actually heard the
order from Vol’jin.
I will not let Sylvanas tarnish my faith in Baine, he thought
resolutely. With a deep sigh, he rose and tossed the letter into the fire,
watching as the flames flared brightly and reduced the parchment to a
blackened writhing ball and then to ashes.
“Did Perith accept my letter?” Anduin asked, forcing his voice to be
calm and level.
“No,” Valeera replied. Another gut punch. “He thought it would
endanger his chieftain. There are eyes upon him.”
“Perith is very wise,” Anduin replied.
“But he said he would tell Baine what the letter said.”
“I had so hoped that Baine would support my plan.”
“He may yet.”
“Or he may do nothing that smacks of disloyalty. I can’t blame him.
I’d do the same. A leader who jeopardizes his people is no leader at
all.” Anduin kept his gaze on the flames.
Valeera stepped beside him. “There is one thing more,” she said.
“Baine wanted you to have this.”
She extended her hand. A small piece of what looked like bone, no
larger than Anduin’s fingernail, rested in her gloved palm. It took
Anduin a few seconds to comprehend what he was looking at, and
when he did, his breath caught.
This was a piece of Baine’s horn, chipped off in an offering of respect
and friendship.
His hand closed slowly around it.
“I’m sorry, Anduin. I know what a disappointment this is.”
She did, too. He looked down at her, smiling sadly, recalling the
days not so long ago when she was much taller than he was.
“I know,” he said. “And I thank you for it. For everything. It seems
each passing day reduces the number of people I can rely on.”
“I hope you will always count me among that group,” Valeera said.
“Never doubt that,” Anduin assured her.
Her eyes searched his for a moment. “You are a kind person,
Anduin. It’s in your nature to think the best of people. But you’re also
a king,” Valeera said quietly. “You cannot afford to trust unwisely.”
“No,” he agreed sadly. “I can’t.”
They stood by the fire in silence for a long time.
SILITHUS
The two moons were out tonight. Sapphronetta Flivvers, peering up at
them after a long day of travel and setting up camp, said to her
companion, “You know, they’re really very beautiful.”
The night elf Sentinel, Cordressa Briarbow, said, “Do you know their
names?”
Heat came into the gnome’s round face. “Um…one of them is the
Blue…ah…something.” At the night elf’s soft chuckle, Saffy blushed
even more deeply. Her former husband had always told her how cute
she was when she blushed, which Saffy detested and which made her
flush—not blush!—with anger whenever he said it. Which of course
just made him happier.
“I’m sorry,” she said. “I’ve spent almost my whole life underground
or in a lab, you see. I’m afraid I don’t get outside very much.”
“You are well versed in so very many things I could never
understand, Sapphronetta,” Cordressa said gently. “No one can know
everything.”
“Try telling that to my ex-husband.”
Again the soft chuckle. “The moons are named the Blue Child and
the White Lady, the Child’s mother. The White Lady has different
names. My people call her Elune. The tauren call her Mu’sha. Once
every 430 years, something truly marvelous occurs. The moons align
with one another, and for a few precious, glorious moments it looks as
though the Lady is holding her Child. Our world is bathed in a bluewhite radiance, and time itself seems to stand still if you look upon it
with an open heart.”
Gazing at the beautiful orbs, Saffy let out a soft breath of awe.
“When did it last happen?” she asked, wondering if she’d learned this
interesting tidbit in time to witness the event.
“Five years ago.”
Saffy’s face fell. “Oh,” she said. “Guess I probably won’t be around to
see it.”
The long-lived elf, who probably would be around to see it, did not
reply. “But you can see them both now in the beautiful, clear sky of the
desert.”
That was probably the first time Saffy had heard the word
“beautiful” to describe anything concerning Silithus. Even before it
had a gargantuan sword sticking out of it, by all accounts it was a
hideous place. Her gaze traveled to the sword now. It was hard to miss.
Not only was it humongous, but it was surrounded by a creepy aura of
red light, so it was an eyesore at any time of day and night. The black
monstrosity had been plunged halfway into the poor ground. Steaming
fissures had been revealed, yielding the mysterious Azerite in its two
forms—fluid and hardened blue-gold chunks. Saffy was more than a
little frustrated that Mekkatorque and Brann Bronzebeard had sent
her off on the expedition before she’d had a chance to actually touch
the stuff. Their notes were useful, but she couldn’t wait to see—and
feel—the substance herself.
And the desert that surrounded the sword was hot, filled with
insects of all shapes and sizes, cultists, mysterious things lurking in
ruins…that was beautiful?
Well, all right, Saffy could agree that the sky was beautiful. She
sneaked a glance upward at her companion, her face upturned and
bathed with light as she smiled slightly. Other members of the
Explorers’ League, too, had paused to regard the pair of moons. Again
Saffy looked up at them as well. How could they be so placid, the Blue
Child and the White Lady? Just—sailing through the night sky,
blissfully unaware that below them a giant sword was sticking out of
the world!
That was when Saffy realized she’d spoken out loud. She clapped a
hand over her mouth. Expecting laughter or chastisement for her
outburst, she was surprised when Cordressa placed a gentle hand on
her shoulder, having to stoop to do so.
“You but say what we all think,” she said. “Their peace is enviable.
But we know better. In a way, I envy the druids of the Cenarion Circle
and the shaman of the Earthen Ring. They are looking at means to
help Azeroth directly. That must be very gratifying.”
Now it was Saffy’s turn to reassure the night elf. “The Explorers’
League has a role here, too. Last time things went bad in this place, it’s
because something very old got riled up.”
She stabbed a finger in the direction of the sword. “Magni told us
that Azeroth was hurting. But we also don’t know how deep that thing
goes; what Sargeras might have disturbed or awoken that’s also
contributing to her distress. And this time, we’re walking right into an
area that we know to be dangerous. High Priestess Tyrande and you
are helping Azeroth by protecting us.”
Us. It was Saffy’s first expedition, though she’d been a consultant
member back at the Hall of Explorers for a while. The whole thing was
terribly exciting, though that was tempered by the proximity of so
many goblins.
Cordressa smiled down at her. “I have not worked much with your
people,” she said. “But if you are a typical representative of the
gnomes, I clearly need to rectify that.”
Saffy blushed again. “We all just do what we can,” she said. She had
been tapped because she was a well-recognized geologist specializing
in mineralogy. The archaeologists on the team would be looking for
Old Gods, ancient doomsday technology—the usual sorts of things.
Saffy had been brought into the mix specifically to study Azerite.
Provided they could actually get to any Azerite. The goblins—oh,
how she hated goblins—were squatting on the visible seams of the
stuff and conducting eye-hurtingly ugly mining forays. For the last two
days, the league members had stayed safely away, observing with the
telescopes and various contraptions with which Mekkatorque had
furnished them.
Frustrating and crude as this method was, Saffy already had learned
a great deal from her observation. For one thing, Azerite was liquid
when it bled from the earth, turning solid only when it was exposed to
air. Fascinating!
The other thing was that the ground near the sword was warm all
the time, not just during daylight hours. Deserts had wildly fluctuating
temperatures, from scorching in the day, to if not exactly chilly at least
considerably colder at night. Not Silithus, not now.
Saffy was itching to get her hands on more of the material. She’d
been added to the team after the Stormwind king had visited
Ironforge, leaving with them only a small chunk to study. The next
task would be to send out scouts to obtain more samples of Azerite,
preferably from a variety of locales. Then Saffy would get to do what
she loved to do: analyze, study, and understand.
It pained—physically pained—her to think about all those goblins
messing around with this precious substance. The only value it had to
them was how they could “transmute” gold liquid into gold coins.
Goblins. How could anyone stand doing business with them? Filthy
things. It was all about the boom and the flash and the noise, not the
science of it all.
“Your thoughts are not happy ones, Sapphronetta,” Cordressa said.
Saffy realized that although her face was still turned up to the moons,
she was scowling. “Come. Let us eat something. Then some of my
sister Sentinels will stay and guard you while you sleep.”
“Some?”
The night elf smiled, her eyes glowing in the darkness as brightly as
the moons did. “Some. And some others will begin the first scouting
mission.”
That made sense. The kaldorei were called night elves for a reason
other than the twilight hues of their skin and hair. They were used to
hunting in the nighttime hours.
Saffy was thrilled. “Maybe you will return with some samples I can
study!”
“Maybe, although I expect samples will come later. You must
cultivate patience. More likely, we will return tonight with information
on the enemy’s numbers and locations. Maybe intel on their plans,
too.” Smiling impishly, she tapped one long purple ear. “Not only do
we see well, we hear well, too.”
Saffy laughed.
—
Dinner, as was always the case whenever dwarves were involved, was
hearty, stick-to-your-ribs fare washed down with plenty of beer. Saffy
didn’t want to think too hard about what was “beer basted” out here.
She’d heard one of the Sentinels talking fondly about the gooey spider
legs she’d grown up on, and that had been quite enough.
After the meal, two Sentinels, including Cordressa, slipped quietly
out into the warm night. The leader of the expedition, Gavvin
Stoutarm, gathered the five members of the league and addressed
them.
“We’re a tight-knit bunch,” he said, “an’ we’re nae too accustomed
tae night elves bein’ part o’ our number.” Although the Explorers’
League was open to all races of the Alliance, it seemed to appeal
mostly to humans and dwarves, with the odd gnome or worgen
showing up now and then. Night elves were a rare sight, as they were
usually against disturbing the earth for the purpose of removing
artifacts from where they lay hidden.
“I’m proud o’ how ye all have interacted wi’ ’em. We’re all on this
poor world together, an’ we’re all pullin’ together. No offense tae other
guards we’ve had, but I fer one will be sleepin’ sounder than usual
tonight.”
“Och, Gavvin, ye’ll be sleepin’ sounder because ye drank about six
pints o’ brew!”
Guffaws filled the night air, with Gavvin Stoutarm, who certainly
had indulged his thirst, laughing the loudest. “Off tae yer bedrolls wi’
ye,” he said.
Despite the reassuring words, Saffy found sleep elusive. She tossed
and turned, first in her bedroll and then on it—it was so terribly hot—
and then back in it because she realized that outside the bedroll meant
insects. And sand.
She huddled, sweltering, listening to the loud nighttime sounds of
four dwarves snoring loudly enough to wake the dead. It was a good
thing there were Sentinels standing guard, she thought. Stoutarm’s
wheezing and snorting otherwise would have brought the goblins
down on them in droves just to shut him up.
Saffy must have been more tired than she thought. Somewhere
between the snores and the insects and the heat and the sand, she
drifted off to sleep.
She awoke to the hideous sound of goblin bellowing, the crack of
rifles, and the clang of steel against steel. Bolting upright, struggling to
escape the confining swaths of fabric, Saffy went for the pistol she kept
under her pillow and scrambled to her feet. Her heart thudded wildly
in her chest as she glanced about frantically, barely able to take in the
scene playing out before her.
The moons’ light, so pleasant and calming earlier, now seemed cold
and uncaring as it illuminated the bodies of two dead Sentinels. Their
blood looked black in the pale blue light, and the glow had fled their
eyes, leaving them dark pools of shadow. There was another body, too
—a body Saffy didn’t want to look at for fear the panic that was clawing
at the back of her brain would swoop to the forefront and shut down
her ability to think, Saf y, think—
Her former husband had insisted that she have a weapon. She told
him she’d take a lab over an arsenal any day, but right now she wished
she’d practiced with the thing. Why hadn’t she taken her Lightning
Blast 3000 with her? She’d actually gotten it working—
Saffy gripped the pistol with small, shaking hands, jerking it around
toward the noise of each new horror that unfolded. Loud, fierce
dwarven swearing brought a rush of joyful tears to her eyes. Gavvin
Stoutarm, at least, was still alive and kicking—and punching, and
biting, from the angry sound of a squealing goblin.
The gnome’s soft mouth set in a hard line. She forced her hands to
stop shaking and focused not on the awful, gut-wrenching sounds her
friends made as they were fighting and—
—dying, Saf y, they’re dying—
—and she pointed the pistol at a squat, large-eared shape that was
blotting out the horizon’s stars.
She squeezed the trigger. There was a gratifying shout of pain. The
resulting boom had knocked her back, and she scrambled to her feet
only to discover to her horror that the goblin hadn’t been dispatched
but was merely enraged.
“Why, you little—”
Saffy fired again, but this time the shot went wide as the dark shape
reached out and seized her arm. He squeezed it hard, and with a gasp
of fear and fury the mineralogist was forced to drop the gun.
“Hey! Kezzig, that’s a gnome lady!”
“Yeah,” Saffy’s assailant said, making a fist and drawing back his
arm, “and I’m gonna punch the living—oh.” The fist paused in
midmotion. “Maybe she’s not the right one.”
“She fits the description perfectly. You know the rules.”
“Yeah, yeah, stupid rules,” the goblin named Kezzig muttered. He
lowered his fist. Saffy took the opportunity to squirm, simultaneously
attempting to twist free and bite the muscled arm.
Kezzig shrieked in pain but didn’t release her. “Okay, you little
spitfire, all bets are off.”
The last thing Sapphronetta Flivvers saw was a huge, dark fist
silhouetted against the too-calm, too-dispassionate night sky.
T
he sense of peace that stole over Anduin as he entered the
Netherlight Temple was balm to a spirit still wounded from
Valeera’s news regarding Baine. It felt as if someone had tucked a
thick, warm blanket around him while he lay cold and shivering. He
smiled softly to himself and once again marveled at the Light’s ability
to comfort.
Archbishop Faol glanced up from an old tome he’d been perusing as
Anduin approached. The glow in his dead eyes increased with
pleasure, and his lips twisted in a smile.
“Anduin!” he exclaimed in that curiously warm voice, obviously
remembering that the king of Stormwind had asked him not to use the
formal title. “I had not expected to see you again quite so soon. Sit
down, sit down!” He gestured to a chair beside him.
Anduin returned the Forsaken’s smile with one of his own, accepting
the offered seat. Even as he did so, he mentally shook his head. Sitting
comfortably beside a Forsaken. It was something he’d never really
thought would happen.
If only everyone could experience the peace of the Netherlight
Temple, he thought. Maybe then we’d stop trying to kill one another.
Faol chuckled, that raspy sound, as of two pieces of parchment
rubbing together. “Tell me all about your visit to Teldrassil.”
A blood elf priest approached with a bottle of fruit nectar and a
glass. Anduin thanked him. Pouring, he said, “The night elves can
always be relied on to care for the world. By the time I visited
Darnassus, they had already dispatched several groups of priestesses
and druids into Silithus to create moonwells.”
“Ah, moonwells. I never saw one while I lived, and, well, I try not to
get wet these days. But I hear they are sights to behold.”
“They are. If the kaldorei are successful, this could help Azeroth
greatly. They are also sending Sentinels to accompany less militaristic
organizations such as the Explorers’ League.”
“This all sounds quite positive,” Faol said.
“It is,” Anduin said. “But I think we can do more. I’m going to
emulate the night elves and send along some of Stormwind’s finest as
well. What’s happening to the world…we can’t afford to lose those who
might be able to find a solution to it. I thought I would come back and
see how your priests were doing in spreading the word.”
“Of course!” Faol said. “I’m proud to say that we’ve all stepped up to
the challenge.” He looked up and beckoned. “Calia, my dear, won’t you
come join us?”
As Calia approached them, Faol continued, “She wants so much to
help. I’ve appointed her our liaison to the Alliance races, whereas I’ve
been familiarizing myself with all kinds of new parts of Azeroth by
visiting Horde members. It’s been most enlightening!”
Calia now stood beside Anduin, looking from one to the other. “It’s
good to see you again, Anduin,” she said.
“Our young friend has just returned from Teldrassil,” said Faol. “He
says the night elves are already hard at work, and I informed him that
we’ve not been shirking our duties, either.”
“I’m glad to hear it,” Anduin said. “Actually, I came here hoping to
speak with both of you on another topic as well, if we have time.”
“Ha!” said Faol, delighted, as Calia slipped gracefully into the seat
beside Anduin. “Saa’ra will be so jealous; usually everyone comes to
see it. As for time, we have nothing but it in this place. It has done the
Conclave good not to stay cloistered here but to be out and about in
the world again. Now, then. You’ve visited Ironforge and Teldrassil,
and it sounds like both have already taken immediate steps.”
For the next several minutes, Calia and Faol gave Anduin a rundown
of where they had traveled and where they had sent others to travel.
“We try to take into account whom we’re talking to,” Calia said. “For
instance, if we are traveling to the Echo Isles, we send one of our trolls.
To Tranquillien, a blood elf.
“Some have already heard,” Calia said, “and I regret to tell you that
some are still more interested in mining the Azerite than in helping
Azeroth.”
Anduin nodded. “Not unexpected, though it’s extremely
unfortunate.” He sighed. “It does sound like we’ve done what we can.
We just have to protect the Azerite as much as possible and attempt to
ensure the Horde doesn’t acquire much of it.”
Even as he said the words, Anduin knew the idea was nothing but
wishful thinking. For some reason, the goblins had figured things out
first. They had descended on Silithus en masse and set up mines and
ways to process the material before Shaw could even report back to
Anduin. That battle might be lost already, and the thought pained him.
But there might be one way to fight back against the Horde without
fighting at all. Anduin had hoped to have Baine quietly helping from
the other side, but that was not to be. If this idea was to work, it would
be up to Anduin.
He folded his hands in front of him and looked from Calia to Faol. “I
wanted to discuss the Forsaken,” he said. “And I apologize in advance
if I sound ignorant or insulting.”
Faol waved his words away. “No need at all to apologize. Asking
questions is how we learn, and I happen to have some answers.”
Despite the archbishop’s assurance, Anduin was convinced he’d
sound rude. He was beginning to think that discretion was the better
part of valor and that he’d be best served by excusing himself now.
“I had seen Forsaken before now,” he said. “And I was aware that
they—you—were not mindless, raving Scourge. I also never thought
you were inherently evil.”
“But you thought us capable of doing evil things,” Faol said. “Don’t
worry about that. That’s nothing more than being observant. I’ll be the
first to admit the Forsaken have done terrible things. But so have
humans. Even the tauren have a skeleton or two in their closet—
metaphorically speaking, of course.”
Anduin grinned, pleased that Faol understood him, and continued.
“I found them…less relatable than the other Horde races, even though
many used to be human. Perhaps because they used to be human. The
Alliance turned them away. People that in life they knew. Maybe even
had loved.”
“Fear is a powerful emotion,” Calia said quietly. Something in the
tone of her voice, in the way she held her body, brought home to
Anduin that her astounding journey of survival had to have been
harrowing, perhaps beyond his ability to understand. She sat with her
hands in her lap, tightly clasped, and he saw that they trembled.
“Calia,” he said before he could stop himself, “how did you possibly
survive?”
She lifted her sea-blue eyes to his. All over again he was reminded
that she was Arthas’s sister, familiar to him though he had never met
her. Her smile was sad.
“By fate and by the Light’s mercy,” she said. “One day I will tell you.
But it is still too…too close. Not just my journey, but…I lost people I
loved, you see.”
Anduin nodded. “Of course. Your father…and brother.” It was a
painful, ugly story. Arthas, corrupted by the sword Frostmourne and
pulled step by step from the path of the Light by the whispers of the
Lich King, had not simply turned the citizens of Lordaeron into
monsters. He had used a public welcoming ceremony as a chance to
murder his father as Terenas sat upon his throne. Anduin suddenly,
sickly realized that it was possible—no, probable, a near certainty—
that Calia Menethil had witnessed that murder. Again he marveled
that she had been able to escape.
“Not just them,” Calia said. “Others I loved as well.” The king’s eyes
widened. Did she have a family of her own?
“I understand. I’m sorry if I caused you any distress.” He bit his lip,
wondering if he should continue. She seemed to sense his dilemma
and straightened a little, giving him a wan smile.
“Go ahead. Ask me what you will. I can’t promise I’ll answer, but I
will if I can.”
“You had to have had a terrifying experience with the undead,” he
said quietly. “How is it that you are so close with the archbishop?”
Calia relaxed and smiled at her old friend. “He helped save me,” she
said. “I remembered him, you see. And in the midst of all that horror,
when I was constantly fleeing so many I loved whose minds and wills
had been stolen from them…to see the face of someone who was still
who he had been—”
She shook her head, in awe of the moment even now, it would seem.
“It was as if hope itself was a sword that stabbed clean through me.
Except instead of wounding, it offered me the chance to move through
my shock and pain to a place of healing. So you see, for me, the
Forsaken weren’t monsters. They were friends. It was the Scourge, the
shambling, stumbling things that wore my friends’ faces—they had
become monsters.”
Faol appeared genuinely moved by her words, and Anduin
wondered if he’d ever heard them before. The archbishop took her
hand, patting her healthy human flesh gently with his withered, almost
mummified fingers.
“Dear child,” he said. His voice was thick, as if with unshed tears.
Could Forsaken weep? Anduin realized that he had no idea. There was
so much about them that he didn’t know. “Dear, dear child. The joy
was mine at finding you alive.”
Anduin was glad he had come. It had been, beyond a doubt, the
right decision. “There’s something I’d like to do,” he said, “and I’d like
the two of you to help me.”
“Of course, if we can,” Faol replied.
“A terrible war has come to an end. One that has harmed both
Horde and Alliance. Tens of thousands of lives were lost, including
those of Vol’jin and my father. Now we hear that our own world might
be another casualty, with a precious substance that I cannot in good
conscience allow to fall into hostile hands. The goblins certainly know
about it, and Sylvanas is probably already plotting how to use it
against us. But that’s not happened yet. We have an opportunity here
to come together—truly come together—and work on a large scale the
way the Earthen Ring and the Cenarion Circle do. The way this temple
does.”
They were both listening. They did not scoff at his passion for peace
as Greymane did or regard him with skeptical compassion as Valeera
did. Encouraged, Anduin continued.
“Already, either Sylvanas or other factions have murdered innocent
people who have done nothing but try to learn about the world’s
wound. I have an idea on how we can stop that. But I can’t implement
it directly. Not yet.”
He paused. What he was about to say should have grown easier with
time, but it had not. “Many believe Sylvanas deliberately betrayed my
father and the Alliance at the Broken Shore. No one on our side is
going to advocate extending an offer of peace without getting
something in return.”
Faol looked at him searchingly. “Do you believe she betrayed King
Varian?” he asked calmly.
Anduin thought about Baine’s report of the incident. “I don’t know
what to believe,” he said finally. “But I do know how my advisers—and
most of the Alliance—feel about her. She’s the enemy. But she’s not
devoid of the ability to care about one thing, if nothing else.”
Calia looked a bit confused, but Faol’s eyes were bright with
understanding. “I think I see where you’re going with this, my boy.”
“She cares about the Forsaken, people she views as her children.
And the Alliance cares about their fallen loved ones.”
Faol’s glowing eyes widened, but it was Calia who spoke first.
“You’re saying that the Alliance was devastated after Lordaeron
because so many of their loved ones were killed—or turned into the
Scourge. It was personal loss.” She paused. “Like mine.”
Anduin nodded. “Yes,” he said quietly. “And they’ve come to believe
that the Forsaken are undead monsters. To most of my people, they’re
no better than the Scourge. But you know better. You found hope and
help from a Forsaken who had been a friend in life and was still a
friend in death.”
But Faol was shaking his head. “You and Calia are remarkable
individuals, Anduin,” he said. “I’m not sure your average human
would be able to make the leaps the two of you have.”
“That’s because they haven’t had the chance to,” Anduin insisted.
“Calia was rescued by someone she knew and trusted, someone who
didn’t let her down. At Garrosh Hellscream’s trial, the Vision of Time
showed me another courageous Forsaken—Frandis Farley. There’s a
Fredrik Farley who’s the innkeeper in Goldshire. They could be
relatives. I wonder if Fredrik would like to know that Frandis died
resisting a cruel and unfair leader. I’d like to think he would.”
He leaned forward, speaking from his heart. “There have to be so
many stories, Faol. So many. Lordaeron and Stormwind were more
than political allies; they were friends. People traveled easily and freely
throughout the kingdoms. There have to be relatives who mourn their
loved ones as dead when in reality they’re still—”
The king paused, realizing what he was about to say. Faol smiled
sadly.
“Alive?” The archbishop shook his head. “It’s probably a mercy they
think them dead. Too many can’t shake their prejudice to even try to
see us as we really are.”
“What if they did try?” Anduin leaned forward in his seat. “What if
some of them were open to the idea? To meet their loved ones who’ve
been…changed, yes, but still who they were? Isn’t that better than their
being truly dead?”
“Not for a great majority, it isn’t.”
“We don’t need a majority to begin. Look at Calia. Look at me. We
just need some. We need a spark of understanding, of acceptance.
That’s all. Just a single spark.”
His voice trembled as he said it, and he felt the Light wash through
him with its sweet, warm blessing. Anduin knew he was speaking a
great truth. One that would require effort and nurturing, but one that
could indeed catch fire and sweep through the world.
And when it did, nothing would be the same.
“I think he’s right,” Calia said. Her voice was stronger than it had
been since the conversation had begun. There was color in her cheeks,
enthusiasm in her face. She was lit from within, as he was, by the
breathtakingly daring act of hope.
Calia turned to her friend. “I was lost, Alonsus. Emotionally and
physically and mentally. You brought me back from a very dark place.
What other wonders could that again work? For both Forsaken and
humanity?”
“I have seen much darkness,” Faol said, and for once he was not
warm and quietly mirthful. He was serious, and the lights in his eyes
glowed a different shade as he spoke. “Much, much darkness. There is
evil in this world, my young friends, and sometimes it does not require
corruption from an outside source to thrive. Sometimes it is born in
the hearts of the least likely seeming people. A tiny seed of resentment
or fear finds fertile soil and blooms into something terrible.”
“But isn’t the reverse also true?” Anduin pressed. “Can’t a tiny seed
of hope or kindness find fertile soil as well?”
“Of course it can, but you are not talking about a tiny seed,” Faol
said. “First, the only Forsaken you know of who would support such a
thing are myself and a few here in the Conclave. There may not be
many others who would. And if there are, you then must work with the
leader of the Horde—the Banshee Queen. She may not want her people
thinking fondly of their time as living beings. And finally, are there any
humans other than Calia who would even wish to meet their, er, stillexisting relatives or friends?”
At Anduin’s crestfallen expression, the Forsaken archbishop
softened. “I’m sorry to discourage you. But a ruler—even a priestly one
—must know all the obstacles in his path. You want what is right,
Anduin Llane Wrynn. And it is my fervent hope that this idea of yours
will come to fruition. But perhaps that hour is not now.”
Anduin didn’t quite slump, but he wanted to. He ran a hand through
his hair and sighed. “You may be right. But it’s a chance to reunite
families. To get us all working together so that we’re not focused on
trying to kill each other. It’s a chance to stop the harm to Azeroth. This
is important on so many levels!”
“I didn’t say I disagreed with that.” Faol fell silent for a moment,
thinking. “I’ll tell you what. I’ll talk with the rest of the Forsaken
priests and get their opinions. We can begin to lay the groundwork for
this.”
The young king brightened somewhat. “Yes. That’s probably the best
way to proceed for now. But lulls in aggression between Alliance and
Horde seem to be rare. I had hoped to make the most of—”
“Your Majesty?” Anduin turned to see High Priestess Laurena. Her
normally friendly visage held an expression of concern, and her voice
was somber.
Anduin went cold inside. “What’s wrong?”
“It’s Wyll. I think you’d better come back. Immediately.”
G
enn was there to meet Anduin and Laurena as they stepped
through the portal. The look in the older man’s eyes was like a
cold hand around Anduin’s heart.
“Your Majesty,” he began.
“Is he…?”
“No, no. Not yet. I’m no healer, but I think it won’t be long now.”
Anduin shook his head. No. There was still time. The Light was with
him. “I won’t accept that,” he said, almost biting off the words as he
raced toward the servants’ wing.
“Anduin,” Genn called after him. But the young king wouldn’t listen.
Aerin. Bolvar. His father. He’d lost too many he’d cared about. He
wasn’t going to lose Wyll. Not today.
As was proper for someone with so high a standing in the
household, Wyll had a fairly large room. It was impeccably tidy, like
the man himself. There was a washstand with a spotless basin, mirror,
and shaving supplies along with a wardrobe, a clothing trunk, and a
comfortable chair for reading. A mug of tea and a small bowl of nowcold cooked grains sat on a table next to it.
The only reason the bed wasn’t perfectly made was that Wyll was in
it. Anduin’s heart lurched painfully. Wyll would never say how old he
was, but Anduin knew that he’d tended the young Varian Wrynn and
he’d hinted that he might even have served Llane Wrynn, Anduin’s
grandfather, when he, too, was young. But in Anduin’s mind, Wyll was
ageless.
He had been old ever since the king could remember, but he’d
always had the energy to keep up with his young charge. Now, as
Anduin regarded the figure lying in the bed, he felt as though all of
Wyll’s years had descended upon him at once. His normally ruddy face
was pale, and his high cheekbones that had always made him look
distinguished now only emphasized the sunken cheeks. He
remembered noticing that Wyll had been losing weight even before
they had traveled to Ironforge. He had thought nothing of it then. But
it was as if the weight had simply melted off his tall frame. He looked
diminished, smaller. Frail. Anduin felt a sudden, shameful flush of
guilt.
“Wyll,” he said, and his voice cracked.
The old man’s eyelids, paper-thin and blue-veined, fluttered open.
“Ah,” he said, his voice reedy. “Your Majesty. Please forgive me if I
don’t rise. I told them not to disturb you.”
Anduin grabbed the chair and pulled it over to Wyll’s bedside,
reaching for the gnarled hand. “Nonsense,” he said. “I’m glad they did.
You’ll be fine in just a moment. Wyll, you’ve been there for me for as
long as I can remember. Anticipating my wants and needs as if by
magic. You’ve taken care of me all my life. Now let me take care of
you.” He took a deep breath and asked for the Light. At once his hand
grew warm.
But to his shock, Wyll made a soft noise of protest and drew his
hand back. “Please…no. That won’t be necessary.”
Anduin stared at him. “Wyll…I can heal you. The Light—”
“Is a lovely and beautiful thing. And it loves you, my boy. Just as
your father did. Just as I do. But I think it’s time I was on my way.”
Anduin’s stomach clenched. He knew he couldn’t restore the old
man’s youth. Although he did not think that such was beyond the
Light’s power, if such a thing were possible, it was not granted to
priests or others who used the Light to heal. But Anduin could cure
whatever sickness was sucking the life out of his old friend. He could
remove aches and pains and stiffness. Wyll had, albeit with reluctance,
permitted him to do similar things in the past. Why was he refusing
aid now, when it counted more than ever before?
“Please. I…need you, Wyll,” Anduin said. It was selfish, but it was
true.
“No, you don’t, Your Majesty,” Wyll said very gently. “You’re all
grown up now into a fine young man. You need a valet, not a child’s
servant. I’ve made a list over there of fellows I can recommend.”
Wyll turned his white head and pointed with an unsteady finger.
Sure enough, on the little table, there was a rolled-up scroll lying next
to a book. Anduin noticed there was a bookmark inserted threequarters of the way through. He seized on this and said, “But your
book…you’re not done with your story.”
Wyll chuckled, wheezing. “Oh,” he managed, “my story’s finished,
I’m afraid. And it’s been a fine one, if I do say so myself. I’ve gotten to
serve under three kings—good ones. Fair ones. One who needed a bit
of guiding, to be sure. And don’t worry, I’m not talking about you, my
boy. I’ve had a purpose, and true love, and just enough danger to make
things interesting.”
He turned his watery eyes on Anduin. “But I’m tired, dear boy. I’m
very, very tired. I’ve lived long enough, I think. The Light’s got far
better things to do with itself than to heal cranky old men who’ve lived
long, full lives.”
No, Anduin thought. No, I don’t think it does.
“Please let me help you,” he said, trying one last time. “I’m just
starting my reign. And I’ve lost so much. So many.”
“I’ve lost everyone,” Wyll said almost conversationally. Anduin knew
that the elderly man was not upbraiding him, but even so, he felt heat
rise in his face. “Your grandparents. Your parents. My brothers and
sisters and nieces and nephews. All my old friends. And my beloved
Elsie. They’re all waiting for me. Can’t quite see them yet, but I will. It
would be a grand thing to move with no aches and pains, I’ll admit
that. But it’s going to be a grander thing to set all these burdens down
and be with those I loved.”
Anduin couldn’t think of anything to say. He wondered what it was
that was finally taking Wyll away. An illness? He could purge it. A
weak heart or another failing organ? He could repair it.
He could, but had been forbidden to. His eyes stung.
Wyll gently laid a hand on Anduin’s arm. “It’s all right,” he said.
“You are going to be a wonderful king, Anduin Llane Wrynn. One for
the history books.”
Anduin covered the hand with his own. He did not call on the Light.
He would respect the wishes of this good man who had served the
royal family his whole life.
“I’d be a better one with you making sure my crown sat just right on
my head,” he said, recalling his trip to Ironforge a few years earlier,
when Wyll had taken a good fifteen minutes arranging the prince’s
circlet.
“Oh, you’ll figure that out,” Wyll said.
“Wyll,” Anduin said gently. “Will you let me ease your pain, at
least?”
The old servant—the old friend—nodded. Grateful for even this little
chance to help, to make at least some feeble attempt to repay Wyll for
all he had done, Anduin asked the Light for that and only that. A soft
radiance limned his hand. The illumination traveled quickly to Wyll’s
hand, then raced along his body for a few seconds, flaring brightly
before it faded.
“Oh, yes, that’s quite nice,” Wyll said. He looked better. Not quite so
pale, and breathing seemed to come easier to him as his chest rose and
fell evenly. But Anduin’s own chest was tight with grief.
“What else can I do? Something to eat, perhaps? I hear the chef has
perfected some pastries.” Wyll was as bad as any six-year-old child
when it came to sweets.
“No, I don’t think so,” Wyll said. “I think I’m done with that now.
Thank you, though, Your Maj—”
“Anduin.” His voice broke. “I’m just Anduin.”
“You’re good to an old man, Anduin. I shouldn’t keep you. Please
don’t berate yourself for this. Nothing is more natural than what I’ll be
doing shortly.”
“I’d like to stay if you’ll let me.”
Wyll eyed him. “I’d not cause you any more pain than I have to, dear
boy.”
Anduin shook his head. “No. You won’t.” It wasn’t a lie. Not quite.
Losing Wyll would be devastating whether Anduin was present or not.
But at least if he was here when the old man breathed his last, Anduin
would know he had done all he could. He had been denied the chance
to be with his father when Varian died. They had embraced when the
king left, and their words to each other had been kind. But Varian had
fallen alone save for the presence of demons and his killer, and not
even his body could be recovered.
Wyll had earned the right to have someone with him at the end. He
had earned it a thousand times over.
“How about I read you the rest of the book?” Anduin said.
“That would be very pleasant,” Wyll said. “Do you remember that I
taught you to read?”
Anduin did. The memory made him smile. “I used to get upset when
you would correct my pronunciation,” he recalled.
“No, not really. You were a very mild-tempered child. You just got
frustrated. There’s a difference.”
A lump wedged itself in Anduin’s throat. He hoped he could read
past it. He owed Wyll that much, at least. “All right. We’ll read. Let me
get you some water.”
He stepped outside to call for someone and found Genn pacing in
the hall.
“How is he?” Greymane asked quietly.
Anduin couldn’t speak and took a moment to compose himself.
“He’s dying,” he replied. “He won’t let me heal him.”
“He told the same thing to High Priestess Laurena when I called her
in to look at him,” Genn said.
“What? Genn, why didn’t you tell me?”
Genn looked at him levelly. “Would it have made any difference to
you?”
Anduin sagged. “No,” he said. “I’d have asked him to let me try
regardless.”
Genn reached out and squeezed Anduin’s shoulder. “For what it’s
worth, I’m sorry. And it’s his choice. You can’t save everyone.”
“It feels like I can’t save anyone,” Anduin said.
“I know that feeling, too,” Greymane said. Anduin thought about
what the other king had endured and knew it to be true. Only a few
refugees had escaped Gilneas, and it was only through the night elves’
kindness that they had survived at all.
The young king nodded, his heart as heavy as lead inside his chest.
He took a deep breath. “I’m going to read to him for a while. Would
you mind having someone bring some water and cups?”
Genn seemed about to speak, then nodded. “Of course. Would you
like someone to stay with you?”
“No. I’m fine. I just…well. If there’s an emergency, you know where
to find me. I think it will be soon.”
The older man nodded sympathetically. “I’ll station someone
outside just in case. You’re doing a good thing, my boy.”
“I wish I believed that.”
“When you are Wyll’s age or mine, you will.”
—
The next few hours slipped by. Wyll had perked up for a bit and
accepted some water, though he wouldn’t allow Anduin to fuss too
much over him. He listened to the book, which was a history about the
Dragon Aspects, and initially made a comment or two. Then he spoke
less and less, and finally Anduin realized the old man had drifted off to
sleep.
Or had he—
As Anduin leaned forward to make sure Wyll’s chest was still
moving, Wyll’s eyes flew open. Anduin realized at once that Wyll was
looking at something the king couldn’t see.
“Papa,” Wyll murmured. “Mama…”
Anduin put the book down and took the old man’s hand. How thin
the skin was, how twisted the fingers, like a tree’s roots. Yet up until
his last few days, Wyll had completed his duties. Anduin’s eyes stung
again as he envisioned those hands performing with difficulty things
he himself could do so easily.
How had he not noticed this? I’m so sorry, Wyll. I didn’t want to
see.
Then, suddenly, Wyll grew querulous. “But…where’s my Elsie? You
had to have died, dearest. If you’d survived the Scourge, you’d have
found a way to come to me. Elsie, where are you?” His arm extended,
reaching for his phantom wife. “I can’t find my way without you!”
Anduin’s heart was breaking. Gently, he called the Light and placed
his radiant hand on the old man’s now clammy brow.
“Shh,” he said softly. “Be at peace. You’ll find each other, old friend.
You will. When the time is right. But now rest.”
Wyll blinked rapidly, frowning a little, and when he turned to
Anduin, it looked as though he did recognize his charge. “Anduin?
You’re here, too?”
“Yes, it’s me. I’m here. I won’t leave you.”
Wyll settled back down, closing his eyes. “You were such a good boy.
It was a joy taking care of—” He broke off in midsentence. Anduin bit
his lower lip.
Then the old man rallied. “Tell her I always loved only her. My little
Elsie with the fire-red hair. If you see her. Tell her I’ll wait for her.”
Tears stung the king’s eyes. “Of course I’ll tell her. I promise.” He
swallowed hard. “You go on now.”
“I think I will. It’s really quite beautiful,” Wyll sighed. “Thank you
for not keeping me.”
Anduin started to say something but then closed his mouth. He
could feel the old man’s pulse slowing…slowing…heard a soft sigh
from the bed.
Slow…slow…
Stop.
G
enn was waiting for Anduin outside the door. When the king
emerged, Genn looked at him with eyes that held far too many
sorrows.
“I’m all right,” Anduin said. It wasn’t quite true, but he had a
purpose now, and that helped. “I need you to do something for me.”
“Of course. What do you need, my boy?”
“Please ask High Priestess Laurena to prepare Wyll’s body for burial
with all rites due to so close a friend of the Wrynn family. Then tell my
advisers to meet me in the map room within two hours. Notify High
Exarch Turalyon and Alleria Windrunner that I desire their attendance
as well.”
Genn’s bushy eyebrows rose at that, but he stopped just short of
asking why. Instead he said, “You don’t need to do anything just yet,
you know. Your head—”
“Is clear,” Anduin replied. “But I thank you for your concern. I’ll be
in my quarters preparing for the meeting.”
He turned and strode off before Genn could continue to press him.
He had been alone with Wyll’s body and his own pain for an hour
before emerging, and the first wave of grief had crested and receded.
Now he needed to focus.
Anduin spent the hours before the meeting writing furiously and
consulting various tomes, then said a quick prayer to calm himself and
went to meet his advisers in the map room.
Everyone he had requested was there: Genn Greymane, Mathias
Shaw, Catherine Rogers, Alleria Windrunner, and Turalyon. Even
Velen had traveled from the Exodar to be present. When Anduin
informed them of his plans, only Velen stood with him.
Rogers, of course, was no surprise. “Have you been to Southshore
recently?” she snapped rhetorically. “The very creature you’re
negotiating with deliberately unleashed the blight against an Alliance
town! I had friends—family—there. Now there’s only Forsaken.”
“The Forsaken are not the Scourge,” Anduin reminded her. “Some of
them retain a sense of who they were, and they miss their living
relatives.”
“I can’t believe them capable of such things,” Catherine retorted.
Anduin turned to Shaw. “Spymaster?” he asked calmly.
Shaw nodded. “His Majesty is correct. A short while ago, he asked
me to send extra agents to the Undercity. A governing body has sprung
up in Sylvanas’s absence. They call themselves the Desolate Council. I
have reason to believe that the king’s proposal of a gathering would be
extremely well received among this number. But they do not represent
the majority of the Forsaken.”
Rogers looked stunned. Anduin took a step toward her, beseeching
her. “Catherine…your family and friends…they could be among the
council.”
For a moment, he saw something soft flit across the sky admiral’s
face. Then her jaw tightened, and that face grew harder than he had
ever seen it.
“They are dead.” She all but spit the words. “Worse than dead—
monsters. How can you possibly imagine I’d want to see them as they
are now?”
“Remember, Sky Admiral,” Anduin said, his voice still kind, “you
speak to your king.”
All the color that had fled her face rushed back. She bowed
immediately. “My apologies, Your Majesty, if I’ve given offense. But
the shambling wrecks of my loved ones are the last thing I would ever
want to see. I’d prefer to remember them as they were. Alive, healthy,
happy…and human.”
“No offense was taken, Admiral,” Anduin replied. “And your point is
understandable. King Greymane?”
“You know my thoughts on Forsaken,” Genn growled. His voice was
so rough and deep, the older king might as well have been in his
worgen form. “I agree with the admiral. They’re monsters. If we care at
all for our Forsaken relatives, we should be trying to give them true
deaths, not embrace what they’ve become.”
Anduin’s heart sunk further with each opinion voiced. “Reunions
can often be disappointing,” Alleria said bluntly. “You may not know,
but recently Vereesa and I met with Sylvanas. It…did not go well.”
“No, I didn’t know,” Anduin said, strain creeping into his voice. He
thought about his words to Valeera: It seems each passing day
reduces the number of people I can rely on. “Perhaps you would care
to enlighten me.”
“We met only to see what was left of our family ties,” she said. “I will
tell you more if you wish. But suffice it to say that I would not put my
faith in her, Anduin Wrynn. She has been too long in the darkness,
and it has eaten away what is left of the sister I loved so dearly.” Her
voice was strong, yet it quivered slightly. Despite all that had
happened to her, despite her worrisome familiarity with the Void, it
was obvious to Anduin that she was still capable of deep love. She was
still Alleria. And the failure of the reunion of the three sisters had
wounded her. It did not bode well for his plan to convince this group
of the power of familial bonds.
“Nor would I trust the rot-riddled brains of the Forsaken to be able
to distinguish friend from foe if they came face to face with their
erstwhile loved ones,” Alleria continued. “I would advise against this
path.”
“As would I,” said Turalyon, startling Anduin. More than most, the
paladin understood the power of the Light and how it could change
minds and hearts. He had even befriended and fought alongside a
demon who had been infused with the Light. “I ask you as a tactician:
Do you really wish to risk failure? You could start a war. If even one of
the Forsaken snaps and kills an Alliance member—”
“Hell,” boomed Genn, “if one of the Alliance members sneezes too
loudly, we’d have war. It’s too risky, Your Majesty.” He calmed himself
before continuing in a quieter voice. “Light knows your heart’s in the
right place. And it’s a bigger, more generous heart than mine. But you
have to be a good king as well as a good man.”
Valeera had said something similar. Anduin knew the truth of the
words, yet he also had to be true to himself.
Genn continued. “We have more than enough to keep us occupied
and sleepless at night with goblins, Azerite, and a damaged world.
Let’s not start a conventional war over, what—a total of a few dozen
individuals? We gain so little and stand to lose so much.”
“We stand to gain peace,” came Velen’s quiet voice.
“The actions of a few dozen…people,” and Rogers pronounced the
last word in a slightly strangled tone, “don’t determine peace.”
“No,” Anduin said. “Not in that moment, perhaps. But over time. If
this goes well—”
“If,” Greymane emphasized.
Anduin shot him a sharp look. “If this goes well,” he repeated,
adding, “and I believe it will, this could plant a seed. If these few
people can find common ground, why not a hundred, or a thousand, or
ten thousand, or more?”
Aware that negative emotions were running high and threatening to
overshadow other factors, he tried appealing to their tactical minds.
“Why would Sylvanas openly start a war? She’s got much to lose and
little to gain. The Horde is preoccupied with the same concerns that
face the Alliance: how to recover from the devastating war with the
Legion. How to heal Azeroth and how to keep Azerite from falling into
the hands of the opposition. Do you think she wants to fight another
open war with all that going on?”
“There’s always a plan with that banshee,” Genn said. “She’s always
steps ahead of us.”
“Then let us work out the same steps ourselves. In no scenario does
open warfare work to either the advantage of the Horde or that of the
Alliance.”
“That we know of,” Alleria said. “And there is much none of us
knows about Sylvanas and how she thinks.”
“Is there anyone present who thinks she would wish to see harm
come to the Forsaken?” Anduin challenged.
There was silence.
“The Forsaken are her people. Her creations. Her children in a way.
We’ve seen mountains of evidence that she is trying to save them, to
find means to prolong their existences.”
“As I’ve said before, she wants to make more of them by killing us,”
Genn said. “What if she thinks these humans might be amenable to
becoming Forsaken themselves? They could be with their loved ones
forever that way.”
“So she could kill our people, recruit a couple dozen new Forsaken—
and immediately enter a war. That’s an excellent tactic.” Anduin tried,
but he couldn’t quite keep the sarcasm out of his voice.
Genn fell unhappily silent. Anduin looked at them one by one. “I’m
aware that this could backfire. The Forsaken could find themselves
envious of the living, which could solidify a moderate attitude into a
zealous one. The same could be said of the Alliance side. They may
find themselves repulsed by people they once loved and become more
determined than ever to destroy the Forsaken. But I believe they
deserve the chance to find out. Both the humans and the Forsaken.”
The hawks in the group stood with their arms folded and their lips
pressed together. It was clear to them that Anduin’s mind was made
up. Even though they outnumbered him four to two—Shaw seemed to
take no side—they knew this encounter would proceed.
Genn tried one final time. “I think the others need to know what I
do,” he said, not unkindly. “That you lost your oldest friend just a few
hours ago. You told me Wyll had wanted to see his wife, who died at
Lordaeron. You’re doing this for him, and I understand why you want
to. But you can’t put innocent lives at risk just to make yourself feel
better.”
“You’re partially right, Genn,” Anduin said quietly. “I would be lying
if I told you that I don’t wish with all my heart that Wyll and Elsie had
been able to see each other again. It’s too late for Wyll, but it’s not too
late for others.”
He placed his hands on the map table and leaned forward. “If
Sylvanas responds with terms that are acceptable to me—terms that I
believe will adequately protect Stormwind citizens—this meeting will
take place. I expect all of you to accept that and turn your attention to
following my orders to ensure that everything goes according to plan.
Do I make myself clear?”
Nods and a few murmured “Yes, Your Majestys” went around the
table. “Good. Now let’s start our preparation.”
S
apphronetta Flivvers awoke to pain.
The gnome was bruised and battered, and her hands and feet
were securely tied. She flexed them, noting that she still had good
circulation, and began to assess her current situation.
It wasn’t promising. She was lying facedown across something
warm, and she could feel muscles tensing and contracting beneath her
and hear the slow flap of wings. Gryphon? No; feathered wings
sounded different when they beat. Wyvern.
She had known her team would be targeted. That was why they had
beefed up the security. Saffy felt an awful pang for her friends and for
the Sentinels who had been assigned to help them.
That an attack had come was hardly a shock. But why had she been
allowed to survive? The Horde, of course, wasn’t fond of any of the
Alliance races, but they had little use in particular for gnomes. Yet here
she was, not just spared but taken. Kidnapped!
She tried to recall the exact words she’d heard: Kezzig, that’s a
gnome lady!
Yeah, and I’m gonna punch the living—oh. Maybe she’s not the
right one.
She fits the description perfectly. You know the rules.
Yeah, yeah, stupid rules.
They had come to kill the Explorers’ League members and their
protectors; that much was obvious. They hadn’t been looking for her
but for someone who looked like her, and they wanted the “gnome
lady” alive. If she could just figure out what they were after, she might
be able to bluff her way to safety—and a chance to escape.
Saffy couldn’t feel the comfortably familiar, pleasant weight of her
massive tool belt. Obviously, they’d taken that. It was a shame they’d
put ropes on her instead of locked chains, because she was pretty sure
they hadn’t removed her hairpins. There was nothing she could use as
a weapon, and someone had to be sitting near her to make sure the
gnome they’d gone to all this effort to abduct wouldn’t fall off in
midflight.
Urf. Now there was a thought. Saffy stopped even her slight
squirming and lay still, thinking furiously. They’d have to land, and
they’d have to take her out of the sack in which they’d thrown her.
They must want something from her or whoever they thought she was,
but she couldn’t imagine…
Oh, wait. Yes, she could. She could imagine it all too well. They’d
been in Silithus, and they knew there were goblins out in force. Goblin
activity meant one of two things: profit or technology. Well, all right,
three things: profit, technology, or mining. Well, no: profit,
technology, mining, or pummeling people.
And goblins also meant…
Oh, come on, Saf y, she told herself. There are a lot of goblins in the
world. The odds of what you’re thinking are approximately
5,233,482 to 1. Someone would have to know your location, and—
Oh, dear. They didn’t have to know her location. They were
kidnapping every “gnome lady” they came across who fit the
description.
The wyvern landed with a thump. Saffy started to slide off and
couldn’t suppress a gasp. Then the bag that encased her was abruptly
dragged off the mount, and Saffy let out an oof as she was flung onto a
bony shoulder.
She heard whirring, buzzing, beeping sounds and muffled
conversation in, as expected, Goblin. A language she’d picked up long
ago, when she had been young and innocent and—
Stupid. Come on, admit it, Saf y. Stupid.
She couldn’t quite make out most of what they were saying, but she
caught enough: …dead…take her…better be worth…know what to do.
Her heart sped up. No. It couldn’t be. The odds were—
She was dropped unceremoniously on the floor.
“She better be okay,” came a voice from Saffy’s past. A voice
attached to a goblin she despised with every fiber of her being. A
goblin she had hoped to never have to lay eyes on for the rest of her
life.
She should stay quiet. Not give him any gratification. Pretend to
cooperate with whatever dastardly, despicable scheme he was plotting.
The bag was opened, and she blinked, momentarily blinded by the
light. Rough hands grabbed her arms and held her down as a knife
sawed through her ropes. Then she was hauled to her feet.
“Hey, hey, what did you do to her?” came the loathed voice. “Her
face is all—”
With a roar of fury stoked by years of simmering resentment, Saffy
managed to wrest free of the two bruisers on either side and launch
herself like a mini-rocket, complete with fiery red hair, at her
archenemy.
The symbol of misery, frustration, and rage.
She had the satisfaction of watching his tiny eyes widen in shocked
horror and his big knobby hands come up toward his face.
“You lying, manipulative, lazy, horrible, no-good, filthy wretch!”
Saffy shouted, her hands, fingers formed into claws, outstretched to
scratch his eyes out.
Tragically, the bruisers got her just before she was able to scratch
eight perfect furrows in that ugly green face. A rag coated with who
knew what foul material was shoved into her mouth, and she was
trussed up again. Could she ever learn to get her temper under
control? Apparently not. Then again, this was Grizzek. He deserved
everything she could throw at him. Just the thought made her squirm
with impotent fury.
“You change your mind, we’ll take care of her,” the biggest, burliest
one said.
“No need, Druz,” the loathed coward said. “You guys scram. I got
this.”
Saffy continued to squirm as Grizzek showed the bruisers out.
“Hello, Saffy! Hello, Saffy!”
He couldn’t have—but he had. There it was, the beautiful, exquisite
parrot she had created. Oh, if she could just get free for two minutes—
“I’m sorry they hurt you. They weren’t supposed to.”
“Mmmphh mhphfmpp oo?” she repeated incredulously, and then
launched into a string of beautiful but sadly unintelligible cursing.
“Funny thing is, that group wasn’t even looking for you. They were
after your friends. I—I’m sorry about that, too, kid.”
But you’re not sorry you had me kidnapped! she tried to say. All
that emerged was more muffled noises.
“No, I’m not sorry about that. Besides,” he said, shaking his head,
those big ugly ears flapping slightly with the motion, “crazy as it
sounds, I think by the time all this is over, you’re not gonna be sorry
either.”
He winced at her denials this time. “You keep on like that, you’re not
gonna have any voice left.” He paused. “Which, all things considered,
might not be a bad idea.”
She bit down on the terrible-tasting rag, her eyes shooting daggers
at him. After her breathing calmed down a bit, Grizzek came over and
untied the gag, keeping his big fingers away from Saffy’s sharp little
teeth.
They glared at each other. “Aw, Saffy. I gotta say, it’s good to see you
again.”
“The pleasure is all yours,” Saffy snapped.
“Miss me?”
“Yes. Repeatedly. As you recall, my Lightning Blast 3000 failed
every time I took aim.”
“I told you that piece of crap wouldn’t work.”
“Aww, honey, I hate you, too. Tell you what,” the gnome said, “you
untie me, give me food and water and my parrot back, and I’ll head
out and not report you to the authorities.” Of course, she would. In a
Gadgetzan minute, she would. Assuming there were any “authorities,”
wherever they were.
“Can’t do that, Punkin,” he said, shaking his head. “And it’s not your
parrot.”
“It is so my parrot!”
“Nope, we made him together. C’mon,” he said, almost looking hurt,
“you gotta remember that. It was our first anniversary present to each
other.”
It had also been their last. Saffy didn’t want to think how crazy in
love she had been with the green mook. Well, she amended, just plain
crazy, at least.
“Besides. Just hold on to your hat here for a minute and you’ll
understand.”
“Your goons took my hat!” she shouted after him as he wandered
out. Her beautiful pith helmet, given to her expressly for this mission.
“They’re not my goons,” he said. “They’d never have hurt ya if they’d
been my goons. Or your pals. You know I don’t work that way,
Punkin.”
“Don’t call me that!” She strained against the ropes with all the
strength in her small body, but the knots were good. Of course the
knots were good. We’re in Tanaris, by the ocean. Everyone’s a sailor.
Even the goons.
She was thirsty, hungry, overheated, sunburned, and exhausted, and
she slumped against her bonds.
“Here,” Grizzek said almost gently, and took one of the hands that
were bound behind her back. Saffy twitched angrily, but he pressed
something into her palm and closed her fingers over it.
She gasped once. The pain on her sunburned, bruised face eased.
Her mouth was no longer dry nor did her stomach rumble for food.
She felt alert, strong, sharp. Her gaze fell on the parrot.
“There’s about five different things I can do to improve Feathers if
you’ll just give me an arclight spanner, three sets of nuts and bolts,
and a good screwdriver,” she announced. And then blinked.
How had she known that?
Grizzek released her hand. She kept her fist tightly closed around…
whatever it was he had pressed against her palm.
He moved around behind her, sitting in the single chair, watching
her reaction. “It’s something, ain’t it?” he said, his voice soft and filled
with reverence.
“Yeah,” she breathed, as awestruck as he was.
Silence stretched between them. Then, finally, Saffy asked, “What is
it?”
“Boss says it’s called Azerite,” Grizzek said.
Azerite! The very substance she’d been brought into that awful
desert to analyze. Now Saffy understood why. Her brain was on fire
but calm, not frantic. This stuff was amazing.
“Actually, what the boss really calls it is ‘My Path to Ruling Azeroth
with Lots of Statues to Glorious Me.’ ”
Saffy abruptly recalled one of the things he’d said to her while she
was shouting and struggling to escape. They’re not my goons, he had
said. Which meant that they were someone else’s goons. Which
meant…
“Oh, Grizzek,” she said, horrified. “Please tell me you aren’t working
with that ugly green monster with the terrible fashion sense!” She
paused. “That could apply to lots of goblins, actually. What I meant to
ask was—”
“I know what you meant,” he said, lowering his head and not
meeting her eyes. “Or, rather, who you meant. And yeah.”
“Jastor Gallywix?”
He nodded miserably.
“I don’t think I’ve ever been more disappointed in you. And that’s
saying something.”
“Look. He came to me with this stuff. You got a taste of what it can
do. He’s agreed to let me decide what I do, what I make, and most
important, how it’s used. And he’s given me everything I’ve asked for
supply-wise in order to understand it, refine it, and make amazing,
fantastical inventions with it.”
“Everything, huh? I guess that explains why you had me
kidnapped.”
“Punkin, I—”
She shook her head. “No. I get it. I…” She gulped. Swallowing her
pride was hard. “I might have done the same. Might have. Probably
not. But I might have.”
His eyes widened in an expression of gratitude, and his ears drooped
ever so slightly with relief. “So…you’ll help me?”
“I’ll help you.”
“Aw, Punkin, we made a hell of a team back when,” he said.
She smiled. “Yeah. We did. Too bad we got married and ruined all
that.”
“Well, we ain’t married now, so I say, let’s get to work.”
“You have to untie me first.”
“Oh? Yeah, right, sure.” He slipped off the chair, reaching for a knife
with one hand, and hurried behind her. Her bonds were cut free for
the second time that morning.
Belatedly, he paused. “You…you mean it, right? You’re not going to
clonk me with something and run off with Feathers?”
The thought had occurred to her, but Saffy didn’t volunteer that bit
of information. No, she was in this for the long haul. Anything that
could do what this Azerite could do was something she wanted a part
in developing. What vehicles, what gadgets and trinkets, what
contraptions they could create!
“No. I won’t do that.” She got to her feet as easily as if she hadn’t
spent far too long in a burlap sack being shunted across a continent.
“But I do have one condition.”
“Anything!”
“When we’re done, I get Feathers.”
He winced, then stuck out his hand. She opened up her tiny pink
one, seeing the soft golden-blue gleam of Azerite, and then it was
nestled between their two hands as they shook on it.
V
ellcinda didn’t miss sleep.
She had not realized until after her death just how much time
had been wasted with her eyes closed and her body still. There was an
old saying, “Plenty of time for sleep in the grave,” but she had found
the reality to be exactly the opposite. She’d slept far too much when
she lived: an entire third of that life, how remarkable. Now that she
was a Forsaken, she had done all she could to make the most of what
she, with what remained of the incorrigible optimism she’d had in life,
firmly viewed as a second chance.
She’d been a servant when she died. So of course, when Vellcinda
“awoke” as a Forsaken, the first thing she did, as her mind gradually
became accustomed to her new reality, was serve. It was what she
knew best. She’d been kind and patient with those who had awoken
terrified and disoriented and had helped to rebury those who had
refused Lady Sylvanas’s dark gift.
Part of her understood the refusal. Who among them hadn’t been
confused and frightened to awaken to the sight of their own skin
decaying? No one with half a brain left, that was who. And of course,
some of the poor things didn’t have even half a brain.
Vellcinda seemed to have been one of the fortunate ones who’d
awoken with their minds completely intact, thank you very much, and
had firmly resolved to put it to good use.
She missed her husband, and upon awakening, she had wanted to
seek him out. He had been in Stormwind, and Vellcinda had been in
Lordaeron, visiting family, when she died. She had been in the castle
when Arthas had returned. She’d hoped to catch a glimpse of the
beloved paladin and his triumphant homecoming but had been stuck
working in the kitchens as he marched through a rain of rose petals
into the throne room. But she had been well within range of what
unfolded immediately after Arthas committed both patricide and
regicide with one thrust of an unhallowed sword.
Her beloved had been spared that, and she was glad of it. Others
told her that attempts to contact him would only lead to heartbreak for
them both. He believed her dead, and in the end, Vellcinda had
decided that it was better that way. He was a good, kind man. He
deserved to find a living woman to love.
Many other Forsaken, such as her friend and fellow Governor
Parqual, seemed to miss their loved ones as much as she did. Others
seemed lukewarm, and still others didn’t care at all. Some were even…
evil. What had happened, to her, to them, to have such differing
personalities and mind-sets? It was one of the mysteries about being
Forsaken.
She had no memory of her time as a mindless creature, and that was
a good thing.
As the years unfolded, though, Vellcinda grew tired of serving. But
her brain was almost as sharp as it had ever been, and Vellcinda began
to want to learn, to achieve, rather than simply do for others.
She directed her genuinely caring nature toward how best to take
care of the, ah, unique challenges of being an active, sentient corpse.
Injuries, for example.
“Come now,” she would say to the wounded, “Forsaken flesh won’t
heal itself, you know!” Stitching; grafting on new muscle, sinew, and
skin; and magical potions were the options open to her people instead
of simply cleaning a wound, bandaging it, and trusting in the body’s
innate ability to repair itself.
Time spent physically mending undead flesh eventually led to a
desire to study with the apothecaries. Although Sylvanas put most of
them to work on poisons, Vellcinda studied ways to keep the Forsaken
active and healthy, mentally and physically.
She noticed that some of the wounded appeared to be more afraid of
dying now than they had been when they lived. As she inspected the fit
of a new hand onto the right arm of a blacksmith—an accident with
molten steel had made short work of his original one—he had said to
her, “Always makes me nervous to come in here.”
“Why is that, dear?” Vellcinda hadn’t been terribly old when she had
died. A young sixty, she had always said. “I’m far less frightening than
Doctor Halsey.”
The blacksmith, Tevan Whitfield, had chuckled, a raspy, hollow
sound. “That’s certainly true. No, I mean…when I was alive, I felt
immortal. I didn’t take care of myself, and I was a bit reckless. Now I
am immortal, technically. But because injury is the only thing that can
threaten that, I’m suddenly aware of how fragile flesh is.”
“Flesh has always been fragile.” She inspected the hand. She’d sewn
it on well. She noticed again that it didn’t have calluses, nor were the
muscles strong. The previous owner of the hand the blacksmith Tevan
now wore probably had been some sort of artist or entertainer.
She tapped the fleshy palm of the hand gently with her forefinger
bones. “Can you feel that?”
“Yes,” he said.
“Excellent.” She regarded him levelly. “I must let you know that this
hand won’t be as strong as you’re used to.”
“A few weeks of hammering will take care of that.”
Vellcinda gave him a compassionate look. “No, dear,” she said
gently, “it won’t. You can’t grow muscle anymore.”
His face fell. Not literally. His face hadn’t decayed much at all. He
was, in fact, rather handsome for a Forsaken.
“Come back if you can’t use it properly,” she said. “We’ll see if we
can’t find a better one for you.” She patted the hand gently.
“You see?” Tevan had said. “This is what I’m talking about. In time,
we’ll just…wear ourselves away.”
“That’s what happens in life, too,” Vellcinda reminded him briskly.
“We can’t all be pretty, nigh-immortal things like elves. The proper
attitude is that we must accept what we have and be grateful for it. You
and I and the others are here. And that’s a lovely thing. Nothing lasts
forever, and if we die and can’t come back, well, we’ve had a second
chance, and that’s more than many have had.”
Tevan smiled. With his intact face, it was a pleasant expression.
Vellcinda had no false modesty about her own face, which was
somewhat the worse for wear from being a lazy layabout in her grave
for so long. She’d been plain even as a living, breathing human. Her
husband had always said she was beautiful to him, though, and she
believed him.
That was what love was, wasn’t it? Seeing with the heart and not the
eyes and finding beauty there.
“You’re right,” the blacksmith said. “I don’t think I ever thought
about it like that. I chose to receive the Gift. I know others didn’t. At
the time, I thought them fools. But now I wonder. I know Lady
Sylvanas is trying to find ways that we can continue our existence. But
what if we weren’t meant to?” He gestured to his fine new noncallused
hand. “How much should we do, how far should we go, just to keep
existing?”
Vellcinda had smiled. “Goodness, for a blacksmith, your thoughts
are quite philosophical.”
“Maybe it’s my new hand.”
Tevan had been the first with whom Vellcinda had conducted such
discussion, but he would not be the last. Once the idea had come into
her head, Vellcinda found she couldn’t stop thinking about it.
Now, months after that conversation, the leader of the Desolate
Council stood in the throne room of the Undercity, in the spot where
Sylvanas Windrunner had stood for so long until she had left to lead
the Horde. Beside Vellcinda on the top dais were the other four
leading members of the governing council, who were called, simply
and logically, the Governors. On the second step, just below them,
were the seven known as the Ministers, who would implement the
policies the Governors created. At the bottom were those who
Vellcinda thought were actually the most important members of the
council: the ten Listeners. Every day, they would meet and speak with
those among the Forsaken who had questions, comments, or
complaints about how the leadership governed. They reported directly
to the Governors. Although any citizen of the Undercity was free to flag
down any member of the council—including the Prime Governor,
Vellcinda herself—the Listeners were more readily available.
Thus far, things seemed to be going swimmingly. Vellcinda looked
out over the calm crowd that filled the room to overflowing and
continued outside. She was so very pleased. Today, more than ever,
they needed to stand together, work together, for the betterment of
everyone until their Dark Lady returned.
Today they were holding a service for those Forsaken who had
experienced their Last Death, fighting against the terrifying evil of the
Burning Legion. Vellcinda had spoken with the Dark Lady’s champion,
Nathanos Blightcaller, on his recent visit to the Undercity and had
implored him to persuade Sylvanas to return.
“I know she has many responsibilities,” she had told him. “But
surely she can spend a few hours with us. Please, tell her to come for
the ceremony we will be holding for those who willingly accepted
death on behalf of the Horde. She doesn’t have to stay long if her
duties call her, but it would mean so much.”
Nathanos had said he would carry the message. But there had been
no sign that Sylvanas would come.
She waited a few moments longer just in case. The Forsaken in the
crowd waited patiently, as they always did. Finally, their leader sighed.
“I suppose you all want me to speak,” Vellcinda said. “So I’ll try to
say a little something. Forgive me if I clear my throat a few times;
we’re all too familiar with that tickling of the ichor!”
That brought some laughter, raspy and guttural. Vellcinda
continued. “I want to first acknowledge our friends who made the
journey to be here today. I see blood elves, and trolls, and orcs, and
even a few goblins and pandaren. Thank you for standing with us to
honor those who fell from among our dwindling numbers. I’m
particularly grateful for all the tauren out there. If not for you, we
might all be extinct.”
There were representatives of all the Horde races there, but she saw
more tauren than any other. It was thanks to the tauren that the
Forsaken had been admitted into the Horde. Vellcinda shuddered to
think about what would have happened to her people without that
protection.
“Even so, with the exception of our kind friends who stand here with
us, I fear it is, sadly, accurate to say that many of the living still don’t
accept us. And these individuals seem to think that because we’ve
already been dead, we don’t really care about life, or whatever you
choose to call our existence. They seem to think that we should suffer
less when those of our numbers perish. Well, they’re flat-out wrong.
We do care. We do grieve.
“Our queen is hunting for a way to increase our numbers by
bringing back the fallen from the dead. Making more Forsaken. But
what those of us assembled here today really wish from her is to know
that she values the Forsaken she already has. Not just us as her people
—which of course we are—but as individuals. To accept that some of us
are content with just a second chance and might not want a third or a
fourth but the Last Death instead.
“We stand here today, thinking of those who did experience their
Last Deaths. They are gone, utterly. Their blood doesn’t flow in the
veins of their children and on to generations—at least not generations
who will ever live here and interact with us. Those Forsaken are lost,
but they are also at peace. Reunited at last with those they loved in life.
Let us honor their loss by never forgetting their names. Who they
were. What they did.”
Vellcinda steeled herself. “I’ll go first. On this day, I remember
Tevan Whitfield. He was a blacksmith, and he once told me that he
was more afraid of death as a Forsaken than he had been as a living
man. And yet when he was asked to serve, he did so. He made
weapons that enabled others to fight the foe. He mended armor when
it was damaged as we mend bodies when they are damaged. He faced
his greatest fear and lost that gamble. I’ll remember you always,
Tevan. You were a good friend.”
She nodded to Parqual Fintallas, who stood beside her. He cleared
his throat and began to speak of a woman who had been a warrior in
life and in her undeath, until her body had been hacked to pieces by a
fel reaver. The remembrances spread out like ripples from a pond.
First from those who stood on the dais, then the Ministers, and then
the Listeners. Then, one by one, members of the crowd, too, began to
speak.
So many of them had lost their families on that long-ago awful day,
when Arthas had returned, that it was rare to see an intact one. Most
Forsaken had made new families—unions made with those whom they
had never known in life but who were just as important.
As Vellcinda listened, holding her friend Tevan in her thoughts, she
was sad, but she was content. All mourned, but no one wept. No one
railed against injustice. But more important to her was that no one
was angry. She had come to believe that anger wasn’t good for the
Forsaken. Many already weren’t thinking too clearly, with their brains
usually being rotten to some degree or other. As far as Vellcinda was
concerned, rage just muddied the waters until no one could see where
he or she was trying to swim.
There were some in the Undercity who resented the role the
Desolate Council had created for itself, but Vellcinda had been firm
that it was only a stopgap measure. Supplies needed to be brought in.
Replacement limbs had to be attached.
“Gracious,” Vellcinda had said once at a public meeting, “if our dear
Sylvanas should step through that door, I’d be more than happy to say,
‘Hello, Dark Lady, we’ve missed you terribly. Please do take over
running this great city. It’s a very wearying thing!’ ”
As a servant, she had prepared meals, tended the sick, scrubbed
bathtubs, and emptied chamber pots. She’d done what needed doing,
and as far as she was concerned, she’d much rather step back and let
others who were better at leadership step up. She couldn’t recall the
last time she’d just sat and enjoyed watching the calming flow of the
green canals.
She returned to the present, chiding herself for woolgathering.
When the last person had finished talking, she looked at the gathered
crowd. “My, I’m so proud of all of you. And of those who gave all they
had for the Horde. Thank you for coming.”
And that was it. The crowd dispersed, and she watched them go. She
was disappointed that Sylvanas hadn’t accepted the invitation to
attend but it was not unexpected.
“Prime Governor Vellcinda,” came a calm voice. She turned,
surprised and delighted.
“Why, Champion Blightcaller,” she said. “How good of you to come.
I…don’t suppose…?”
He shook his head. “No. Our queen has urgent business to attend to.
But,” he added, “she has sent me to learn more about what is
happening in her absence and to let you know that she does intend to
visit shortly. She regrets that she was unable to be here today.”
“Oh, that is so kind of her! I’m pleased to hear that.” She patted his
arm. “I’m old enough to read between the lines, young man. Lady
Sylvanas is afraid she has another Putress on her hands. But don’t fret.
We’re just a group of concerned citizens, caretakers of a sort, minding
the house while the mistress is gone. Why don’t you come around for a
visit this afternoon? We’ll be happy to discuss what we’re trying to do.
Perhaps you would care for some tea?” Vellcinda liked to brew tea, to
smell it, to hold the warm cup in her hands, even if she did not drink
the beverage.
He looked slightly baffled and opened his mouth to reply. But before
he could do so, Vellcinda heard another voice. “Ah, precisely the fellow
I have come here to meet. Well, not quite, but close enough.”
Vellcinda and Nathanos both turned to see a rather short Forsaken
dressed in priest’s robes. She didn’t recognize him, but that wasn’t
surprising. The Undercity wasn’t vast, but there were still a lot of
people here, not to mention all those who were simply passing
through.
“I’ve not had the pleasure,” she said.
The newcomer bowed. “Archbishop Alonsus Faol,” he said.
Vellcinda was surprised. It had been a well-known name not so long
ago. She was pleased he had not perished with so many others.
“Oh, my,” she said. “It’s an honor.”
Even Nathanos Blightcaller bowed to the archbishop. “Indeed it is.
What is it you wish of me, sir?”
“I have a letter. Actually, two. The first one is for your warchief. The
second one is for someone named Elsie Benton.”
Vellcinda swayed slightly. Nathanos caught her arm, looking at her
with concern, but she smiled and waved him off. “It’s been a long time
since I heard that name. Only my family and closest friends called me
that.”
The archbishop’s expression softened. “Then…here. Your letters.”
He handed each of them a tightly rolled scroll, and Vellcinda took
hers with a trembling hand. Her eyes flew wide as she saw the wax
stamp, which was blue, with the imprint of the lion of Stormwind.
And she knew at once what it was.
So did Nathanos. “This is from the king of Stormwind,” he snapped,
his red eyes blazing with anger as he turned to Faol. “What are you
doing, fraternizing with an enemy of the Horde?”
“But as I’m not a member of the Horde, the king is not my enemy,”
the archbishop said pleasantly. “I serve the Light. I’m a priest, and so
is King Anduin. The letter is for your queen, and it’s important. You
should make sure that she sees it. But,” he added, “it’s not immediately
dire. I suggest that you do as you had intended. Spend some time here
in the Undercity. Take your thoughts and this missive back to the
warchief. And you, dear lady…”
Faol laid a gentle hand on her arm. “This missive, I am sorry to say,
does contain bad news. I’m so very sorry.”
Vellcinda was glad of the warning as she broke the seal, opened the
scroll, and read:
To Elsie Benton,
I do not even know if you still exist. But I feel compelled
to ask Archbishop Faol to search for you while he is in the
Undercity. If you are reading this, I assume his quest was
successful.
It is with the deepest sorrow that I must inform you that
your husband, Wyll Benton, passed away peacefully this
afternoon. I hope it comforts you to know he did not die
alone; I was with him.
Wyll served my father and me devotedly for many
years. He did not speak to me of his family; I suspect it
was too painful for him to recall those times and what he
thought was your fate. He called out for you before he
died and hoped to see you again.
I follow the path of a priest, as you may know, and I
pleaded with him to allow me to heal him. He refused, and
I respected his wish.
I have resolved to do all I can so that those who are
Forsaken can reunite with their human friends and
families, if only briefly. There are some things, I believe,
that transcend the politics of kings and queens and
generals. Family is one of them. To this end, I have sent a
missive to your warchief. I hope she agrees with me.
I close by fulfilling a promise asked of me by my friend
Wyll: telling you that he always loved only you and that
he will wait for you.
Again, please accept my sincerest condolences.
And a signature in an elegant, educated hand: King Anduin Llane
Wrynn.
“My poor Wyll,” Vellcinda said, her voice trembling. “Archbishop,
please thank King Anduin for me. I’m grateful my husband didn’t die
alone. No one should die alone. You tell the king that I think this is a
fine plan. I hope our warchief does, too. I’d have been so glad to have
seen Wyll one more time.”
“What plan?” Nathanos demanded, looking from Vellcinda to Faol
suspiciously.
“This,” Vellcinda said, handing him the scroll. As Nathanos read,
Faol said, “The outline for the king of Stormwind’s proposition is
clarified further in the scroll to be given to Warchief Sylvanas. I will be
here for a few days, and I am happy to answer any questions you or
Vellcinda might have.”
Looking displeased, Nathanos returned the missive. Clutching the
precious scroll, the Prime Governor of the Desolate Council corrected
Faol.
“Elsie,” she said. “I think it’s time I went by Elsie again.”
C
Lu, la lu, my dearest child,
Lu, la lu, lu la lay,
Lordaeron says, “Go to sleep.”
Azeroth says, “Dream you deep.”
Lu, la lu, la lu, la lay,
Safe in my arms you’ll stay.
alia sang softly to the dreaming child she held. This precious little
one would one day be heir to the throne of Lordaeron.
No. No, there was no Lordaeron, not anymore. There was only the
Undercity, inhabited by the dead. Her father’s crown had been broken
and bloodied and now was lost to time. Calia would never wear it now.
This drowsing, dreaming infant would never wear it, either. And that
pained her. A single tear trickled down her face to land on the rosiest,
softest cheek in the world.
The child who was by all rights the trueborn heir to the throne
blinked, the small mouth forming a pout. Calia lifted the bundle and
kissed the tear away, tasting salt on her lips.
And the baby laughed as her mother began once again to sing the
old, old lullaby, glancing up as her husband came in to kiss the top of
his wife’s head. He placed his hand on her shoulder, giving it a gentle
squeeze—
—the bony claw digging deep and—
Calia screamed. She bolted upright, her heart slamming against her
chest, gasping for breath. For an interminable, horrible instant, she
could feel the pain of the undead hand that grabbed her. Then she
blinked, and the horror retreated into memory.
She buried her face in her hands, realizing it was wet with tears, and
tried to still her shaking.
It was only a memory. It wasn’t real.
But it had been, once.
She slipped off the bed, reached for a robe, and then padded
barefoot to Saa’ra.
No matter what the hour, there was usually someone about in the
Netherlight Temple. Someone was always coming in or heading out.
Those who made this place their home knew of Calia’s night terrors
and had made it clear they were available at any time if she needed
company or to talk. But she only ever wanted to speak to Saa’ra.
The naaru was expecting her, as it always did. It hovered over her, a
crystalline entity limned with luminous purple, and emitted a faint,
ceaseless exquisite music. Saa’ra spoke sometimes in words that all
could hear and sometimes directly and privately to someone’s heart
and head, as it did now.
Dear one. I am so sorry the dream has troubled you once more.
Calia nodded, sinking down in front of Saa’ra and twisting her
fingers awkwardly. “I keep thinking that they will stop at some point.”
They will, the gentle being assured her. Once you are ready for
them to stop.
“So you’ve said. But why can’t I be ready now?” She laughed a little,
hearing the petulance in her own voice.
There are things you must do before that peace will be granted to
you. Things that you must understand, that you must integrate into
yourself. People who need your help. What one needs in order to heal
will always come one’s way, but sometimes it is hard to recognize it.
Sometimes the most beautiful and important gifts come wrapped in
pain and blood.
“That’s not making me feel better,” Calia said.
It might when you realize that all that has happened to you hides a
gift within it.
Calia closed her eyes. “Forgive me, but it’s hard to think that way.”
The corruption of her beloved brother and the murder of her father, of
so many of the people of Lordaeron…her flight, her terror…the loss of
her husband and child, the loss of everything—
No. Not everything. What we participate in, we can benefit from.
For every fever you have cured, bone you have mended, life you have
improved…that, and the joy that has come from that, is now as much
a part of you as your pain. Honor them both, dear child of the Light. I
would say trust that there is a purpose, but you already know there
is. You have seen the fruits of your labor. Do not ignore them or
belittle them. Taste them. Savor them. They are yours as much as
anyone else’s.
Her tight chest eased as peace stole into her heart. Calia realized
she’d been clenching her hands, and as she unfolded them, she saw
small red crescents where her nails had dug into the flesh of her palm.
She took a deep breath and closed her eyes.
This time she did not see the horrors of her escape. Or, more
difficult to endure, the sight of her daughter at play. She saw only
darkness, tender and soft. It gentled what was too harsh to bear in the
full radiance of light. It provided safety for wild creatures and privacy
for those who wanted to create, just for a time, a world with only two.
Calia felt Saa’ra’s warmth brush her like the stroke of a feather.
Sleep now, brave one. No more battles, no more horrors for you.
Only peace and rest.
“Thank you,” Calia said, bowing her head. And as she padded back
to her room, a hand on her arm, its flesh cool and unnaturally soft,
made her pause. It was Elinor, one of the Forsaken priestesses.
“Calia?” she said.
Calia wanted nothing more than to sleep. But she had vowed to
always be there for those who needed her, and Elinor looked troubled.
Her glowing eyes darted about, and her voice was pitched low.
“What is it, Elinor? Is something wrong?”
Elinor shook her head. “No. In fact, something might be going right
for the first time in a long, long while. May we speak in private?”
“Of course,” Calia responded. She brought Elinor into her little
alcove, and the two sat down on the bed. Once they were alone, Elinor
needed no further urging to speak. The words tumbled from her
leathery lips so quickly that Calia had to ask more than once for the
Forsaken priestess to repeat herself.
Calia’s eyes widened as she listened, and her mind went back to
what the naaru had told her: There are things you must do before that
peace will be granted to you. Things that you must understand, that
you must integrate into yourself. People who need your help. What
one needs in order to heal will always come one’s way, but sometimes
it is hard to recognize it.
Calia’s eyes filled with tears, and she hugged her friend gently. Her
heart felt full and hopeful for the first time since Lordaeron fell. She
now had a purpose.
Healing had come her way.
GALLYWIX PLEASURE PALACE, AZSHARA
There were many places in Azeroth where Sylvanas Windrunner would
prefer not to be. Gallywix’s disgustingly named Pleasure Palace was
not at the top of the list, but it was close.
Once Azshara had been a beautiful land, full of open spaces and
autumnal hues and opening out to the ocean. Then the goblins had
joined the Horde under Garrosh, and they had defaced the region with
their trademark garishness. The “palace” where she now sat in an
overstuffed chair next to Jastor Gallywix had been hewn from a
mountainside. The escarpment of the mountain had been turned into
a literal “face” so that Gallywix’s grotesque mien leered over the
wreckage of the land below.
The palace itself was even uglier, in Sylvanas’s opinion. Outside was
a vast green lawn with a course for some sort of game involving a small
white ball, a huge pool with a heated area, and bartenders and
waitresses currently standing idle save for those who attended to
Gallywix. Inside was not much better. Tables groaned with food, much
of which would never be eaten, and huge barrels served for decor.
Upstairs was the trade prince’s bedroom. Sylvanas heard it said that he
slept on piles of money, and she was in no hurry to find out if those
rumors were true.
He’d been pleased to receive her message and kept offering drinks.
She declined each time. While he indulged, she told him of the
meeting at Thunder Bluff, omitting the delicate threat she had given
Baine, of course. She would give Gallywix only the information he
needed to know.
“I trust that their efforts to heal the world will not damage your
efforts to gather Azerite,” she finished.
Gallywix laughed, ginormous belly jiggling, and sipped his frothy,
fruity beverage. “Nah, nah,” he assured her, waving a big green hand.
“They can have their little ceremonies. My operation is far too vast at
this point to be impacted. And hey, if it keeps them happy, that’s the
point, am I right?”
Sylvanas ignored the comment. “Your operation thus far has not
yielded much that I can use,” she reminded him.
“Relax,” he said, “I got—”
“People on it. Yes, I know.”
“No, seriously. I got the best minds I know of in a little place in
Tanaris. Gave them a generous dollop of the golden goop. Told ’em to
go nuts.” He took another swig and smacked his lips.
“And?”
“And they’re working on it.” His gaze slid to the side.
“What exactly are they working on?”
“I, ah…told ’em they could do whatever they want. But you know
scientists. They’ll think of things you and I could never imagine. Best
way to operate.”
“I want weapons, Gallywix.”
He downed his drink and waved for another. “Sure, sure, they’ll
have weapons for us.”
“I want them to focus on weapons. Or else I will send in every
Forsaken, blood elf, tauren, troll, orc, and pandaren I can find and
take over your ‘operation.’ Are we clear?”
Sullenly, the trade prince nodded. Doubtless he knew she’d send her
own people around to take the weapons that were made, whereas his
scientists could craft other items he could sell on the side to make a
tidy profit.
A distraction for Gallywix came in the form of a hobgoblin who
lumbered into the room and babbled something only his boss
understood. “Of course, idiot,” the goblin said. “Show Champion
Blightcaller in at once!”
Sylvanas thought she was almost as relieved as Gallywix at the
interruption. Nathanos entered, gave Gallywix the barest minimum of
a nod, and bowed to his queen.
“My lady,” he said, “forgive the intrusion, but I thought it best to
bring you this missive immediately.” He knelt before her and held out
a scroll. It was sealed with blue wax and stamped with the head of a
lion.
“Oho! I know that seal!” Gallywix exclaimed, then sipped his banana
cocktail. Sylvanas knew it, too. She tore her gaze from the scroll and
impaled the goblin with a cold stare.
“You will excuse us,” she said.
He waited for a moment. When she continued to sit, raising a pale
blonde eyebrow, Gallywix made a face and heaved himself out of his
chair. “Take your time,” he said. “I’ll be in the hot tub if you want to
join me when you’re done with this fella.” He waggled his eyebrows,
then trundled out. “Heya, honeybunny, bring me a pineapple punch,
will ya?”
“Sure, boss!” a squeaky goblin female voice replied.
Nathanos’s red eyes were fixed on the trade prince’s retreating form.
“I will kill him,” he said.
“Oh, no. That pleasure will be all mine.”
Sylvanas got to her feet and gazed down at the scroll he held. “So.
This is from Varian’s whelp? Given to you at the Undercity?”
Nathanos’s face was unreadable. “Yes. Hand delivered to me by
Archbishop Faol. He’s now a Forsaken.”
Sylvanas let out a short, sharp bark of laughter at that. “His Light
works in strange ways.”
“So it would seem.”
Sylvanas broke the seal and read.
Unto Queen Sylvanas Windrunner, Dark Lady of the
Forsaken and Warchief of the Horde, King Anduin Llane
Wrynn gives respectful greetings.
I write to you with a proposition that has nothing to do
with armies, territories, or goods, but it is one that I
believe will serve both the Horde and the Alliance.
I will cut directly to the heart of the matter. When you
approached the Alliance, seeking a home for your people,
you were refused. We were still reeling in terror from
what Arthas had done to Lordaeron and couldn’t
understand that your Forsaken were truly dif erent.
I have spoken recently with a Forsaken who was
greatly respected in life and have learned that despite all
he has endured, he still follows the Light. His name is
Alonsus Faol, and he was once archbishop of Lordaeron.
He has agreed to be a go-between in the interest of
helping both the living and the undead.
This missive is about families. Families that were torn
apart not by Horde and Alliance but by Arthas, who
rained despair and devastation upon all of us. Spouses,
children, parents—so many separated, divided first by
death, then by fear and anger. Perhaps, if we can work
together, those driven apart can at last be reunited.
Sylvanas stiffened. Oh, yes. She, more than anyone, understood
about divided families. Slain loved ones. She had lost everything
because of Arthas: her friends, her family, her beloved Quel’Thalas.
Her life. Her ability to care, truly care, truly feel any emotion save hate
and anger about those things.
And she had attempted a reunion. Had accepted her older sister’s
offer to call what Arthas Menethil had left of her family together, to
reclaim Windrunner Spire and purge it of the dark things that dwelled
in it. And perhaps to purge themselves of their own darknesses by
harking back to a time when there were no shadows within them.
But it had been a futile endeavor. Suns and moons they had been
when they were young. Bright Alleria, with her gleaming golden
tresses, and laughing young Lirath. Sylvanas had been Lady Moon,
and Vereesa, the youngest of the three sisters, had been Little Moon.
Vereesa was bowed and sullied with grief for a lost love. The death
of her husband, Rhonin, in Theramore, one of so many victims of
Garrosh Hellscream’s mana bomb, had shattered her. Shattered her so
completely that for one lost, lonely, lovely moment, she had turned to
her shadow sister, Sylvanas, and they had plotted together. Vereesa
had come so close to joining Sylvanas in the Undercity.
So close to joining her in undeath.
But at the last minute, love for her living children had eclipsed Little
Moon’s grief for her dead husband. And so Vereesa had stayed with
the Alliance. And Alleria, thought lost for so long and then
miraculously returned, had invited the unfathomable darkness of the
Void within her. It granted her powers and strength. But it changed
what she looked like as well as who she was—who she was becoming.
Sylvanas knew enough of what such powers could do to recognize the
mark of cold fingers on Alleria.
As for her own shadows and darkness, Sylvanas knew them well
enough not to examine them now.
The boy king’s plan was a foolish one. He still believed that people
could change. Oh, they certainly could. Alleria, Sylvanas, and Vereesa
were all proof.
But it was not change for the better; at least, Anduin would not see it
that way.
Why was she so angry? The pup got under her skin so much more
than the Wolf had.
She returned her attention to the letter.
We are not currently at war. But I am not so naive as to
believe that means hostilities do not still linger. We have
experienced recent tumultuous change to our very world
in the form of Azerite—a manifestation of the pain Azeroth
herself is feeling. With unity, we could direct our
exploration of this substance in ways that can save her.
Let us therefore focus on a smaller but no less important
gesture of unity as a first step toward a potential future
that benefits both the Horde and the Alliance.
I propose what amounts to a single day of a cease-fire.
On this day, those families who have been divided by war
and death will have a chance to meet with the ones they
lost. Participation will be strictly voluntary. All those on
the Alliance side will be thoroughly vetted, and no one
who I believe would be a danger to the Forsaken will be
allowed. I would ask the same of you. We will determine a
limited number of participants.
A site suitable for this event is the Arathi Highlands. I
will have my people assemble at the ancient fortress of
Stromgarde Keep. Thoradin’s Wall is close to a Horde
outpost. There, in the open field, with suf icient protection
as agreed upon by the two of us as leaders of human and
Forsaken, these ruptured families will meet. It will last
from dawn until dusk. With your agreement, Archbishop
Faol and other priests will facilitate, assist, and of er
comfort as needed.
Should any harm befall my people, be certain I will not
hesitate to retaliate in kind.
I also understand that should my people harm any
Forsaken, you will do likewise.
As a priest, as king of Stormwind, and as the son of
Varian Wrynn, I will guarantee safe passage to the
Forsaken who choose to be involved. If this cease-fire is
successful, it could be repeated.
Do not mistake this for an of er of peace. It is only an
of er of a single day’s compassion for people who were
cruelly torn apart by a force that was neither the Horde
nor the Alliance.
You and I have both lost family, Warchief. Let us not
force that upon others who, like us, did not choose it.
Done this day by my hand,
KING ANDUIN LLANE WRYNN
“He is even more foolish than I thought if he believes I do not see
right through his trap,” Sylvanas said, crumpling the letter into a ball.
“What do you think of this Archbishop Faol who gave you the letter?”
“He is indeed Forsaken. He seems genuine, though when I
suggested he pledge fealty to you and the Horde, he demurred. He said
he preferred to serve the Light rather than kings or queens.”
“Ha!” Sylvanas said without humor. “I liberated him to be a
Forsaken so that he could have free will, and thus am I repaid. No
matter. I take it you believe he is harmless.”
“He is powerful, Dark Lady. But he is no enemy. He also brought a
letter for the head of the Desolate Council.”
Sylvanas tensed. “I see that the king’s spies are hard at work if
Wrynn knows of the council.” Wrynn. For so long it had meant Varian.
Strange.
“Possibly. We must remember that many of our number move freely
in the Netherlight Temple. Besides, the letter he sent to her did not
even mention the council. It turns out that until very recently, Elsie
herself was among the number of Forsaken who had living family. Her
husband, Wyll Benton, served both Varian and Anduin Wrynn.”
“Elsie?”
“It was the name Wyll had for Vellcinda, and she’s reclaimed it
now,” Nathanos explained.
The majority of Forsaken had taken new given names or surnames
for themselves. They did so to mark their rebirth as Forsaken, to cast
aside their old identities and bind themselves together as a unified
group. Sylvanas was surprised to find that her chest ached to hear that
Vellcinda had rejected her Forsaken name. “Vellcinda” was a name
with dignity, gravitas. “Elsie” was…well, evocative of what the woman
had been in life, most likely. Common and ordinary. And human.
Sylvanas focused on the other piece of information her champion
had given her. This plan of Anduin’s seemed suddenly much less
strategic than personal if he had lost a devoted servant. Which made it
much less threatening. Even so—
“Vellcinda likely served the royal family as well.” Sylvanas would not
dignify the Prime Governor’s new, offensive name by utilizing it.
“Yes. She worked in the kitchens,” Nathanos continued. “She was
saddened to hear of her husband’s passing. This proposition meets
with her approval, as she believes that she is far from alone in
retaining fond memories of family members.”
Sylvanas shook her head. “This cease-fire is a mistake. It will only
lead to pain for my people. They cannot be human, and to dangle this
temptation of reunion with loved ones will result in them growing
discontented with who they really are—Forsaken. They will deteriorate
to heartbroken shells, wanting something they can never have. I have
no wish to see them suffer so.” Again, she thought of her own attempt
at connection with the living and how all it had done was stir up old
ghosts best left resting in peace.
“You could use this to your advantage,” Nathanos said. “Vellcinda
said that many Forsaken wish their next death to be their Last Death.
They do not wish to keep existing. And one reason commonly cited is
that they want to be with those they loved while they lived.”
Sylvanas turned her head to him slowly, considering his words.
“If you authorize this experience—this reconnection with people
they loved in life—and present it to them as something that you have
generously granted them, perhaps they will be more amenable to
accepting your solution: finding ways to keep the Forsaken as a race
from going extinct.”
“It is fraternizing with the enemy,” Sylvanas said. “Letting them
interact with life and the living.”
“Perhaps. But even so, it is only for a single day. Give them this
hope, this moment with people they thought they’d never see again.
Then—”
“Then I hold the power to their happiness, at least in this aspect,”
she finished. “Or they might decide they hate the living and be all the
more devoted to their Dark Lady.” Either way Sylvanas would win.
He nodded. “At the very least, it will demonstrate to them that you
are listening to their concerns. I truly believe the Desolate Council to
be ultimately harmless. They’re not radical traitors. Give them this
chance, once. If you see benefits, you can determine if you wish to
repeat it.”
“You make a good argument.” She unfolded the crumpled missive
and read it again. “It will be difficult for my archers to stay their hands
with so many humans in front of them.”
“They will obey you, my queen,” Nathanos said. It was the truth. Her
dark rangers would never loose an arrow without her orders. And
Sylvanas was not ready for a war with the Alliance, not over this, at
least.
She made her decision. “I will accept this invitation on behalf of the
Forsaken. Return to the Undercity. Inform Vellcinda Benton that her
queen is sympathetic toward her desire and will be visiting her to
discuss this gathering in more detail. Have her begin compiling a list
of those members of the council who have living relatives in
Stormwind. Get their names and information. I will give that list to
Anduin so that he can locate them and determine if they, too, wish to
participate.”
“There are more than just the council members who would like to be
involved,” Nathanos said. “A great many attended the memorial
service and are sympathetic to them.”
But Sylvanas shook her head. “No. This needs to be a small number
so I can control the situation. Council members only.”
“As my queen wishes. If I may speak freely, I believe you have made
a wise decision. From all that I have seen, I believe this will quell any
rumblings of discontent.”
“One way or another it will.” She smiled coldly. “It could also pave
the way for claiming Stormwind. I had thought that an attack would be
the only means to take it. But if the young king trusts us, we could one
day soon pass through those magnificent gates to a friendly welcome.”
Her thoughts once again went to the astonishing substance that was
Azerite. What it could do. What it could create.
What it could destroy.
S
hortly after Saffy had agreed (“of your own free will, now,” Grizzek
had emphasized) to assist him in plumbing the potential of the
magical, marvelous, miraculous Azerite, Gallywix had sent them a
single large vat of the stuff along with a note: You two creative kids go
crazy!
The first experiments had covered the basic steps: identifying the
material’s properties, testing it under various conditions. Exposed to
sunlight and moonslight. Sealed away, exposed to air. Immersed in
various liquids, including acid and other highly dangerous chemicals.
That had been Grizzek’s favorite part so far.
During one such experiment, Saffy noticed that the thick, tarlike
substance of a deadly poison they’d smeared on a sample chunk had
changed color.
“Will you look at that,” she said. Quickly she grabbed a vial of the
antidote and set it down within easy reach. Then, before Grizzek could
even yelp in surprise, she’d extended a hand and touched the
discolored poison.
“Saffy, no!” He surged forward and grabbed her arm with one hand
and the antidote with the other.
“Hang on a minute,” Saffy said. “This stuff should be eating my skin
away by now. But look. I’m fine.”
They both stared at the poison on her hand, then at each other.
“Nothing ventured, nothing gained,” Saffy muttered. And she licked
the stuff off her fingers.
Grizzek uttered a strangled cry. Saffy smacked her lips.
“Astounding! This highly poisonous, corrosive substance now tastes
like sunfruit and cherries,” she said.
“Maybe it always tasted like that,” Grizzek offered. His voice
trembled a little.
“No, it’s supposed to be completely tasteless.”
“Yeah, whatever, just…just don’t do stuff like that, Saffy, okay?” She
looked at him and saw that he had gone pale. He had been worried
about her. Not just worried as in oh, I’m going to lose my lab partner
worried but worried as in…
Saffy couldn’t let herself think about that. They had work to do.
Bringing old feelings back would only be a distraction. They’d always
done better as lab partners, anyway.
She returned her attention to her hand. “This is…important, Grizzy.
Really important. Long term, who knows what this stuff can do? We’ve
just seen that it can neutralize poison. Bet it can heal wounds, too.
Maybe it can extend life.” She shook her head in disbelief. “What a gift!
Come on, back at it! There’s so much else we need to know!”
After they’d done everything they could to test Azerite in liquid
form, next up were tests to determine if, once it had hardened,
anything could break it.
Nothing could.
Not a sword, or a hammer, or a goblin shredder, or even a device
Grizzek had named the Crunchola, which he demonstrated to Saffy. It
was a modified shredder, but one of its mechanically operated limbs
was outfitted with a grasping hand augmented by an energy beam.
“The idea,” Grizzek explained, “is that the energy pulse increases the
pressure, so it’s seven times as strong as the usual hand.”
“That’s an odd number,” Saffy observed, perplexed.
“It is!”
It took her a second, then she said flatly, “I meant odd as in unusual.
Why not ten or fifteen?”
He shrugged. “Seven is supposed to be lucky.”
She rolled her eyes. They scooped out a pail of liquid Azerite from
the tightly sealed vat Gallywix had provided and placed it to harden in
the open air. The substance slipped out easily once it set and was
surprisingly light. The Crunchola, or “Crunchy,” as Grizzek, who
seemed inexplicably fond of the thing, dubbed it, grasped the chunk of
Azerite in its Lucky Seven energy-enhanced hand. Grizzek threw the
switch. The Crunchola squeezed—tight—tighter—
And then Grizzek shrieked in dismay as its four digits snapped.
“Your hand!” he cried. “Crunchy, I’m so sorry!”
Saffy looked at her notes and crossed off “TEST NUMBER 345:
Crunchola” and wrote down “Azerite 1, Crunchola 0.”
“One resource we do lack is a mage,” Saffy commented, peering at
the unharmed, pail-shaped Azerite. “It would be fascinating to see how
this is affected by magic!”
“If you really want one to join us, I can ask Gallywix.” Grizzek didn’t
sound so keen on it, and Saffy stiffened at the thought.
“Maybe later. Right now we have a good rhythm going with just the
two of us.” She was surprised that she was saying it, but it was
undeniably true. The thought of a third party entering their lab felt
wrong somehow.
Grizzek seemed to brighten at her words. “Yeah, we do,” he said. He
climbed out of the Crunchola, patting its arm sadly. “I’ll fix you up,
buddy,” he promised. Then he took a deep breath and turned to Saffy.
“Magic can be phase two,” Grizzek said. “Let’s exhaust our own
resources and imagination first. Give Gally-boy a baseline for what we
can do with pure science.”
Saffy giggled. “Gally-boy?”
Grizzek scratched his enormous nose and chuckled a little bit.
“Yeah,” he said. “Silly, but the guy bugs me so bad.”
“I think it’s perfect,” Saffy announced. Their eyes met, and Grizzek’s
expression was unguarded.
“Ya do?” he asked, surprised.
“Yep,” she replied. “Pompous airbags sometimes need the
occasional sharp poke. Deflation is better than exploding.”
“For him or for us?”
“Oh, for him, definitely. I don’t care if he explodes.”
They laughed together, just as they had in the old days, in that
narrow band where everything had been perfect and they’d been crazy
about each other instead of being driven crazy by each other.
Watch out, Saf y, the gnome reminded herself. Don’t jinx this. It’s
all going too well for things to turn bad.
“We’ve gathered a good baseline on the nature of the substance in
isolation,” she said. “I’ll compile my notes, and then we can move on to
see what happens when we try to shape it, or manipulate it, or
combine it with other items.”
“Oooh! We should do wearable items.”
“Like rings or necklaces?”
“Yeah! Gally-boy inadvertently gave me the idea. He used the first
known chunk of this stuff as an ornament for his cane. We can
experiment with it and figure out how to make amulets, rings, and
other trinkets with it. Think we can mix it with other metals?”
“We’ll find out!” That was her specialty. “But first I better compile
these notes.”
But Grizzek was shaking his head. “Nope. Those can wait. Go
outside, clear your head.”
“I never go outside.”
“I know. But you oughta. Moons’ll be out here soon. Go on, scram.
I’ll handle dinner.” It was not said unkindly.
“Do you still burn things down when you cook?” she asked.
“Not so much these days.” He made a shooing motion. With a shrug,
Saffy ambled out to the beach. She was not alone, of course; Gallywix’s
goons were stationed all around the enclave and even patrolled the
beaches. But they kept their distance and didn’t bother her or Grizzek
too much.
He’d put out a chair, and there was a table. An umbrella was up as
well, not that one needed it at this hour. As Saffy settled into the chair,
she had to admit that the sky was absolutely glorious and the
moonslight on the ocean was astonishingly soothing.
Saffy usually took a while to wind down when her brain was
percolating briskly. She heard the noise of something clattering behind
her and turned to see Grizzek balancing a tray in one hand and lugging
a chair with the other. He didn’t say anything as he plunked the tray
down on the table and pulled up the chair.
“Wine,” Saffy said, startled. “You poured wine.”
“Yeah,” he grunted. “Had a bottle somewhere. Knew you liked the
stuff.”
He hadn’t really cooked, which was probably why the place was still
standing. He’d just reheated some seafood stew she’d made for lunch
and grabbed some bread. They ate in silence, listening to the sound of
the sea. Saffy was thinking very, very hard, and not about Azerite,
though that did want to sneak in around the corners of her pondering.
“Grizzek,” she said.
“Yeah?”
“When I first came here, you called me by my nickname.” One of
them, at least; they’d had several of them over the sliver of time when
things were going well.
Their marriage had been, well, as short as they were. They had been
lab partners first, and that had gone well, but then they’d been stupid
enough to fall in love with each other. The first month had been
glorious, the very epitome of a great love story. And then it had fallen
apart just like one of Grizzek’s faulty and poorly designed
contraptions. Suddenly everything one did irritated the other beyond
tolerance. Many things got thrown or broken, and once Saffy had
found herself shouting so loudly that she lost her voice. That had been
a horrible day. Grizzek had felt free to taunt her, and she couldn’t
shoot back a pithy retort.
But not even the unpleasantness of that dreadful time seemed to
encroach on their collaboration now. They worked together almost
seamlessly, listening to what the other said, offering suggestions,
forming a true partnership. Saffy was loath to admit it, but the last few
weeks working alongside Grizzek had been pretty good. Wonderful,
actually. That in itself was almost as unbelievable as the strange
material she and her former husband had been working with.
She heard him sniffing and clearing his throat. “Yeah,” he said. “I
guess I did call you Punkin. Sorry, I guess.”
Saffy sipped her wine and thought some more. “It’s been good, these
past few weeks.”
“Yeah, it has.”
“It reminds me of old times,” she said cautiously.
“Me, too,” he said quietly.
She wanted to ask a thousand questions. Do you still miss me? Why
do you think we don’t hate each other anymore? Is the Azerite
af ecting how we feel about each other? Can we only be all right
when we’re working? Would it be a mistake to try again?
Instead, she said, “This Azerite…it’s pretty amazing. Could help a lot
of people.”
“You’re a genius, Saffy. An absolute genius. You’re going to make
such things—”
“And you, Grizzy,” Saffy said enthusiastically. “Your robots, and
your launchers, and those little one-person airships—the Azerite’s
going to help with all that, too!”
“Ya think so?”
“I know so!”
“Saffy, we’re going to make this world sit up and take notice, you
and me. The sky’s the limit.”
Slowly, her heart beating as fast as a rabbit’s, Sapphronetta Flivvers
slid her hand across the table. And felt Grizzek’s big green callused
paw close around it. Gently, protectively, as if it was the most precious
thing in the world.
And Saffy smiled.
—
In between kisses and canoodling, the reunited, reinvolved pair got a
staggering amount of research done. They mixed the Azerite with a
variety of different metals and even used it as paint. They made
pendants, rings, bracelets, and earrings. And they made armor. It was
ugly, goblin-designed stuff, but it wasn’t meant to be pretty. It
survived three solid minutes of bombardment from the reconstructed
Lightning Blast 3000. The only damage was a slight melting of the
metal.
All of this had required only a small amount of Azerite.
Then Saffy decided to go full gnomish alchemist. She began to
experiment with potions. With a single drop of one on Grizzy’s
completely smooth green pate, he grew a luxurious mane of thick,
glossy black hair that flowed down his back.
“Aaaah!” he yelped. “Cut it off, cut it off!”
When a drop of poison was mixed with heated Azerite, a result
similar to the earlier experiment in which Saffy had licked off poison
was achieved. When she poured the mixture on a struggling plant, the
palm tree doubled in size.
“That’s a high ratio of Azerite to poison,” she mused. “Let’s see what
happens when we switch the proportions.”
“Careful there, Punkin,” Grizzek said worriedly. “I only just found ya
again.”
Saffy’s heart warmed, turned over in her chest, and turned to mush.
Figuratively, of course. She went over and kissed him soundly. “I’ll
take every precaution and then some.”
He hovered anxiously as she prepared the poison, then offered to be
the one to mix it with the Azerite. “Oh, Grizzy, you’re so sweet! But you
don’t know exactly how much I used.”
Sticking out her tongue in order to concentrate better, Saffy poured
the precise amount of Azerite into the beaker of poison. There was no
visible change to the substance as she swirled it gently to mix the
contents. Then she took a deep breath and poured a single drop on the
plant.
The reaction was immediate.
The plant went from the almost absurdly healthy, vibrant emerald
green color to first sickly yellow, then black. It drooped, completely
dead.
They stared at it, then at each other. They said nothing. Saffy tried it
on another plant. But this time, before the poison’s effects had visually
manifested, she clipped a segment. The pair of scientists pressed their
heads close together as they watched the section rot right before their
eyes, as if every fragment that made up the plant had been targeted
instantly.
Saffy spoke first. “Let’s increase the amount of Azerite.”
As she was doing so, Feathers flew into the room and circled their
heads. “Big ugly guests! Big ugly guests!” it squawked.
They looked at each other, wide-eyed. “I hope it’s not Gallywix,”
Grizzek muttered. “Hopefully it’s just the goons. I’ll get rid of ’em. Be
right back.”
Saffy’s eyes followed him as he left. She had never before regarded
“just the goons” as a hopeful phrase, but the alternative would be far
worse. They weren’t prepared to demonstrate anything to the leader of
the Bilgewater Cartel goblins yet, and to say that what they’d just
witnessed made her uneasy was as much of an understatement as
saying the Sword of Sargeras was a knife stuck in the ground.
She took a moment to jot down her notes, cataloging the precise
ratios, then doubled the amount of Azerite in the deadly mixture.
She’d just poured a dollop onto another plant with almost identical
results when Grizzek returned. His normally healthy emerald green
coloring had paled to a sickly chartreuse.
“You don’t look good, Grizzy,” Saffy murmured.
“Well,” he said heavily, “I got good news, and I got bad news. The
good news is that that was indeed just the goons.”
Saffy let out a breath she hadn’t realized she’d been holding. “Thank
goodness for small favors,” she said.
“Bad news is Gallywix wants a demonstration in two weeks. And,”
Grizzek added heavily, “he wants us to focus on weapons.”
P
arqual Fintallas stood with the other members of the Desolate
Council for what, he hoped, would be its most productive meeting
yet. This time, he stood a step lower than he usually did, as did all the
members.
The Prime Governor herself stood not on the topmost stair but one
step below it. This time, someone else—someone who should have
been at every single meeting of the council—would finally be present
and occupying that place. Archbishop Faol, who had become a regular
at the Undercity over the last few weeks, stood beside Elsie. They put
their heads together and talked quietly.
The room was filled to capacity. Those who drew breath doubtless
would have difficulty doing so in this room; Parqual was well aware
that although some of the Forsaken had dried out rather than decayed,
most of their number had been raised while they rotted, and the smell
could not be a pleasant one.
Elsie was smiling. So were most of those assembled. They were
excited to be present for this meeting. Parqual was glad, too, but was
not as hopeful as they were about the end results. He and a few others
wanted to move much faster than patient, forgiving Elsie did. He did
not expect Sylvanas to move at a rapid pace, but he was willing to
listen to what she had to say.
All at once, the room went quiet. Parqual turned and saw the figure
of Nathanos Blightcaller standing in the doorway at the end of the long
corridor that led into the large room.
Nathanos waited for a moment, then announced: “Queen Sylvanas
Windrunner, warchief of the Horde and beloved Dark Lady of the
Forsaken, has arrived.”
A cheer arose. Not as lively as an orc’s bellow or as sweet as a hurrah
from a blood elf, but as genuine as it could possibly be coming from
dead throats. And then she was there.
Even here, in the safest place in the world for her, Sylvanas
Windrunner had chosen not to shed her armor, Parqual mused. Did
she simply never remove it?
She stood straight and tall, unlike so many of those who adored her.
Beautiful still, whereas they had been ravaged by death and rebirth.
Then she inclined her head in acceptance of their adoration and strode
with a smooth, elegant gait toward her place as queen of the Forsaken.
“I have missed this place,” she said as she looked around fondly,
nodding to a few individuals she recognized. “And I have missed you,
my people. The orcs, blood elves, trolls, tauren, goblins, and pandaren
are worthy and loyal members of the Horde, but they do not have the
unique bond that you, the Forsaken, and I do.”
There was a rumble of appreciation for the acknowledgment. With
other races, it would be applause and stamping of feet. The Forsaken,
however, had learned it wasn’t wise to unduly wear out their
appendages prematurely with such gestures. Clapping was terrible for
the hands.
Sylvanas looked down at Elsie. “Prime Governor. I hear from my
loyal Nathanos that you have taken good care of my realm in my
absence.”
Elsie inclined her head and bowed as deeply as she could. “Only
because you were absent, my queen. We are dearly glad that you have
come back.”
“Only for a few hours, unfortunately,” Sylvanas said. The regret in
her voice sounded sincere. “But in that time, I hope I will be able to
settle some things that will please everyone here.” She looked out
again at all of them.
“I understand that the Prime Governor has also received a letter
from the king of Stormwind. He proposes a day’s cease-fire in the
Arathi Highlands in order to hold a gathering of Forsaken and
humans. Families or friends who have been separated by the slaughter
that took place in this city only a few years past.”
Sylvanas turned her crimson gaze to Archbishop Faol. “Archbishop
Faol has been speaking both to him and to the Desolate Council. What
are your thoughts on this, Archbishop?”
Faol didn’t reply at once. He looked out at the gathered crowd, then
back at Sylvanas. “You can trust King Anduin, Your Majesty. He means
no ill. I know from my conversations with the Prime Governor and
others in the Undercity that all those here today—and more than a few
Forsaken who could not be present—are in favor of this gathering. It
remains to be seen if the human half of this plan is also amenable. If
they are, I and another priest from the Conclave would be honored to
supervise the event.”
Excited murmuring swept through the hall. The Dark Lady paced
back and forth for a moment, considering. Or pretending to consider,
Parqual thought. She already knows what she will do. This moment is
for our benefit.
Finally, she stopped and faced the throng. “I will permit this.”
A cheer went up. Not a murmuring of approval but a genuine cheer,
even louder than the one that had greeted the Dark Lady. Sylvanas let
her lips curve in a faint smile, then lifted her hand, calling for silence.
“But I must above all ensure the safety of my beloved Forsaken,” she
said. “So here is what I will say to the king when I reply. Each member
of the Desolate Council will submit five names, in order of preference,
of people in Stormwind they would like to meet. If these individuals
are still alive, they will be contacted and asked if they wish to
participate. The king and a priest selected by the good archbishop will
permit only those whom they deem sincere to attend. I will tell him
that his people may assemble at Stromgarde Keep. On the selected
date, we will fly to Thoradin’s Wall before dawn. Champion
Blightcaller, I, and two hundred of my finest archers will be there…in
case the human king decides to betray our trust.”
It was possible. It was unlikely from this king if half the things
Parqual had heard about him were true, but it was indeed possible.
And he had to admit Sylvanas’s words were a comfort.
“Twenty-five priests will be mounted on bats and actively patrolling
the field. In case of an open attack, teams of my dark rangers and
others will be sent to defend you. I will allow the king to field a similar
number of priest defenders, although I do not expect any member of
the council to initiate hostilities.”
It was a lot to protect twenty-two Forsaken. But Parqual was highly
aware of the significance of this meeting, as, clearly, were Anduin and
Sylvanas.
“At sunrise, you will walk forward to a halfway point that will be
marked by Horde and Alliance banners. Archbishop Faol and his
assistant will meet you there. As will your Alliance counterparts.”
Parqual had thought he had passed beyond the ability of such things
to cause deep emotion, but apparently not.
Philia. Would they be able to find her? Would she want to come?
What would she think if she did? He was suddenly acutely aware of
how bent and twisted his body was, of flesh that stank, hanging off
exposed bones. Would she be horrified?
No. Now that the possibility was manifesting, he realized he had
wronged her by fearing her revulsion. Not his Philia. He was quietly
certain of that. If his heart could still beat, it would be racing with
excitement. He felt a gentle touch on his right shoulder and turned to
Elsie. She was smiling for him. Oh, Elsie, if only your Wyll had lived
just a little bit longer.
But Sylvanas, apparently unaware of how profoundly her words had
affected him and others, continued. “All participants will be allowed to
remain on the field until dusk. At that time, you will return to the wall,
and the humans to Stromgarde Keep.”
She paused, again scanning the crowd. “Obviously, what I have just
said assumes that everything goes smoothly. There is a chance that it
will not. If I perceive any kind of danger to you, my people, I shall
immediately order a retreat. A Forsaken flag—not a Horde one—will
fly on the ramparts of the wall, and the horn will sound. If the Alliance
decides to order a retreat, the same thing will happen, except they will
fly the Stormwind flag on Stromgarde Keep and sound their own horn.
If either horn is sounded, you must turn around and return to the wall
at once.”
Her voice cracked like a whip and echoed in the vast chamber. The
effect was chilling, and the crowd was utterly silent.
“Now, then. Are there any questions?”
Parqual steadied himself and raised his hand. The glowing red gaze
fell upon him. “Speak,” Sylvanas said.
“Will we be allowed to exchange anything?”
“Exchanges of trinkets will be permitted in the following manner,”
Sylvanas said. “Prior to the event, anything you wish to give to your
counterparts will be examined. There will be areas on the field where
they may be placed on tables when you reach the meeting site. The
Alliance will do the same. Do not touch anything they have left on the
tables while you are on the field. At the end of the day, these items will
be collected and gone through to ensure they are safe and contain
nothing seditious. They will be distributed to you at a later date. The
Alliance will, I hope, do the same with your gifts.”
“Our Dark Lady is most generous,” Parqual said.
Sylvanas inclined her head. “I take it you have an item you wish to
share.”
“I do.” He thought fondly of a toy Philia once had loved. She had left
it behind when—
“Then it is my sincere hope that the Alliance does not decide to
throw it away,” Sylvanas said in that soft, purring voice. It was a cruel
thought, and Parqual did not like to entertain it.
“Any other questions?”
Another hand was raised. “May we touch them? Our loved ones?”
“You may,” Sylvanas replied. “Although I cannot guarantee that
such a touch would be welcome.”
Again, an unkind thought. Doubt stirred in Parqual’s mind, but he
forced it back. Not his Philia. He had hoped hearing from his leader
would make him feel better, but instead, he felt unsettled and
unhappy. Others seemed to feel that way, too. And then he
understood.
Sylvanas didn’t want them to do this, but she couldn’t come out and
simply forbid it. There were too many of them. Their ideas were
spreading. Even people like Elsie, who were completely loyal to the
Dark Lady, who loved her…even Elsie wanted to take the Forsaken in a
different direction. So Sylvanas was doing what she could to rob them
of any little pleasure in the planning.
Suddenly he saw his “queen” in a new light. He saw many, many
things in a new light.
As if reading his mind, Sylvanas said, “I realize I do not sound
optimistic. That is because I am not. I confess to you now, I wish you
would not do this. Not because I would deny you any joy but because I
would not see you hurt. You are ready to embrace your living relatives.
But do they feel the same? What will you do if they do not wish to see
you? If they think you abominations, monstrosities instead of the
remarkable, courageous Forsaken that you are? If I am cruel, it is only
to be compassionate.”
“Everyone knows that, my lady!” Elsie exclaimed.
“Thank you, Prime Governor,” Sylvanas said. “Are there any more
questions?”
There had to be. But no one was daring to ask them, and Parqual
thought he had drawn enough attention to himself.
“If there are not, Prime Governor, I have some for you. Will you join
me later to discuss them?”
“As my queen wishes,” Elsie said. She turned to the crowd.
“Everyone, I hope you share my pleasure and anticipation of the
coming reunion with our loved ones. I would like to thank Warchief
Sylvanas again for permitting this to happen. It is my fondest wish in
the world that this goes smoothly so that we may see our friends and
families more in our future. For the Dark Lady!”
Another cheer went up, and Sylvanas smiled fleetingly, then stepped
down off the dais. The crowd of Forsaken parted for her. The cheering
continued until Sylvanas, flanked by two dark rangers, disappeared
into the corridor.
Parqual turned to Elsie. “You seem a little melancholy,” he said. “I
thought you would be happy.”
“Oh! Oh, yes, I am. I do admit I’m feeling just a bit sorry for myself,
though. I wish I’d been able to see my Wyll. To show him that after all
this time I still have my wedding ring.”
Surprised, Parqual glanced down at her hand. She chuckled. “Oh,
no, of course it doesn’t fit on my finger anymore. My hands are too
bony, and I wouldn’t want to risk losing it. But it’s safe and sound in
my room at the inn nonetheless.”
He thought of Philia. “Elsie, I’m so sorry,” he said.
She waved a hand. “Don’t you worry about me. I’ve had more luck
and love than most. Wyll’s legacy will be that many others are going to
be able to experience something wonderful thanks to him. It’s all right
if we two didn’t get to have it. One can’t have everything.”
She leaned in conspiratorially to Parqual and whispered, “Even so,
I’m going to loop the ring on a chain and wear it to the gathering.”
“Somehow I think he’ll know,” Parqual said, and meant it.
A
nduin had frankly expected either an immediate refusal from
Sylvanas or a dragged-out back-and-forth communication chain.
To his pleasure—and surprise—the Horde leader had replied promptly
that she was indeed interested in supporting his proposal. But,
Sylvanas had written, we will start with a small, well-vetted group. I
will not risk tempting the less noble among your people to
assassination.
There was a second letter, too. This one had cemented the rightness
of his decision in his mind—and touched his heart as well.
Dear King Anduin,
Thank you for taking the time to write so kind a note
informing me of my dear Wyll’s passing. He was terribly
fond of your family, and it pleases me to know that the
boy he took care of became the man who comforted him as
he left this world.
We all will die eventually, even we Forsaken. It moves
me more than you might imagine to know his last
thoughts were of me. He has never been far from mine.
Archbishop Faol has been a very kind presence here,
and I write today not only to thank you but to let you
know that all twenty-two members of the Desolate
Council gladly accept your of er to meet with our loved
ones who yet breathe—if they want to meet with us.
Our beloved Dark Lady has asked each member of the
council for five names to submit to you. This way, if one
person is no longer living or doesn’t wish to attend, there
are other options for reunions.
As for me, I’ve no one left that I know of to meet during
this gathering of the living and the undead. Wyll and I
weren’t young when death parted us, and most of our
connections were with the royal families and servants.
If pressed, I would say I should very much like to meet
you to express my gratitude in person, but I would
understand that such a thing would be far too risky for
you. Even suggesting this gathering shows much courage,
and I commend you.
Know that your letter is now one of my most cherished
belongings, such as they are, second only to the wedding
ring Wyll gave me so long ago, when we were both young
and happy and the world was full of hope.
Thank you for making it full of hope once again, if only
for a single day.
With respect,
ELSIE BENTON
Anduin felt himself smiling. It faded as he mentally acknowledged
that there were others who, though they would certainly be surprised
by the pair of responses, would not be at all pleased.
A knock on the door brought him out of his reverie. “Come in,” he
called. He braced himself for another scolding from one of his advisers
but was surprised when the guard opened the door and Calia Menethil
entered.
He rose and went to her. “Calia,” he exclaimed, “it’s good to see you.
To what do I owe this unexpected pleasure?” He had been working at a
table and now pulled up a second chair for his guest.
She slipped into the proffered seat. “I reached out to Laurena. I was
worried about your friend. I’m so sorry, Anduin.” Her eyes, the same
sea-blue that Anduin had seen in old paintings of Arthas, were filled
with sympathy. “I understand that Wyll asked you not to heal him. As
a priest, I know how hard a request that is to honor. Especially when
it’s someone you love.”
“Thank you. Wyll was such a constant presence in my life—and in
my father’s, too. I’m ashamed I knew so little about him personally. To
me, he was just…Wyll.” Anduin paused. “You’ve been with the dying,
Calia. You know that sometimes when people pass, they believe they
see their loved ones.”
She nodded her golden head. “Yes. It happens frequently.”
“In his last moments, Wyll was searching for his wife, Elsie.” He
looked at her intensely. “She was at Lordaeron.”
Calia inhaled swiftly. “Oh,” she said. “And now you’re even more
determined to make this gathering happen.”
“I’m absolutely committed to it. My advisers were…not exactly
happy with the idea, but it’s going to happen.” He held up both letters.
“Two letters. One is from the warchief herself. She’s accepted.”
Calia’s face melted into a smile. “Oh, Anduin, I’m so glad! And the
second?”
“From Elsie Benton. The head of the Undercity’s Desolate Council.
She was Wyll’s wife. And she wants this meeting, too.”
Suddenly Calia was up out of the chair and throwing her arms
around him, laughing delightedly. He laughed a little, too, the first
laughter that had passed his lips since Wyll’s death. He hugged her
back. Calia was close to Jaina’s age, a little bit older. He had missed his
“aunt,” and was glad to have found someone similar in Calia.
She drew back, suddenly realizing what she’d done. “My apologies,
Your Majesty. I was just so pleased—”
“No apology needed. It’s good to have someone who…well, who’s
similar to me in some ways. We both grew up royal children, and we
both were called by the Light to become priests. If Moira were to drop
in now, we could form a club.”
Anduin regretted mentioning Calia’s former life almost at once. She
stiffened and looked down. It was clearly still something she didn’t
wish to discuss. Before the moment grew awkward, he spoke again,
changing the subject.
“Sylvanas sent along a list of names gathered from all the members
of the Desolate Council. I’m wondering: Would you like to assist me
when I interview these people?”
They both knew, but Anduin did not say, that she would be of
particular help because she might remember some of the Desolate
Council from their time as living beings. And she also might recognize
some of the names on the council’s list.
She nodded. “Of course. I’ll be happy to.”
“Before we get started on the interviews, there’s someone I think we
should meet,” he told Calia. “He’ll be here this afternoon.”
“Oh? Who?”
“Someone who, I hope, will give us a feel for how the others might
respond. Let’s call it testing the waters.”
—
Fredrik Farley was used to providing food, beverages, and
entertainment for a crowded inn. He also was used to subsequently
breaking up the brawls that often resulted from the combination. He’d
cleaned up blood a time or two and had had to expel a few too-rowdy
individuals from the Lion’s Pride Inn, but mostly he simply made
people happy. His patrons, be they locals or those just passing
through, came to sing songs, tell tales, or sit by the fire with a mug of
ale. Sometimes they poured their hearts out to him or his wife, Verina,
as they offered a sympathetic ear.
What Fredrik Farley was not used to was appearing before the king
of Stormwind.
His first reaction when presented with the summons was terror. He
and his wife took pains to run an aboveboard inn at the Lion’s Pride. It
had been in the Farley family for years and had offered brews to
thirsty visitors since King Llane’s time. Had someone lodged a
complaint because of a recent scuffle? Accused them of watering the
beer?
“Young King Anduin has a kind reputation,” Verina had said, trying
to bolster them both. “I can’t imagine him throwing you in the stocks
or closing our public house. Maybe he wants to talk to you about a
private party.”
Fredrik loved Verina, had since they were both in their early
twenties. And now he loved her more than ever. “I think if King
Anduin Wrynn wanted to host a party, he’s got a lovely keep to do it
in,” he said, kissing her forehead lightly. “But who knows, right?”
The letter the courier presented to him referenced “a personal
matter” and asked for him to come “at his earliest convenience.” That,
of course, meant reaching for his coat and hat after the quick
conversation with his wife and accompanying the courier back to
Stormwind Keep.
He was escorted to the Petitioner’s Chamber. It was a large, austere
room. Lit by lamps and candles, it included an area with a thick, richly
embroidered rug and a few benches as well as a small table with four
chairs in the center. A nobleman with an elegantly trimmed beard and
two long, graying braids of hair greeted him, introducing himself as
Count Remington Ridgewell. Fredrik was invited to take a seat.
“No, thank you, my lord—er—Count,” he stammered. How did one
address a count, anyway? “I prefer to stand if it please you,” he said.
“It matters not at all to me,” the count said. He stepped back a few
paces and clasped his hands behind his back, waiting.
Fredrik removed his cap and held it, now and then nervously
running a hand over his bald pate. He expected to be kept waiting for a
while. Kings, he supposed, had quite a lot of things they needed to do
in a day. He looked about the great chamber. So big! I could fit the
entirety of the Lion’s Pride in here with room to spare, he mused.
“Am I addressing the innkeeper Fredrik Farley?” came a pleasant,
youthful-sounding voice.
Fredrik turned, expecting to see a squire, and instead found himself
face to face with King Anduin Wrynn. But the ruler of Stormwind was
not alone. An older woman stood beside the king, dressed in a flowing
white robe. And slightly behind him was a muscular older man with
white hair, a neatly trimmed beard, and piercing blue eyes.
“Your Majesty!” Fredrik said, his voice climbing with surprise. “Your
pardon—I wasn’t—”
He’s so young, Fredrik thought. My Anna is older than he is. I
hadn’t realized that…
The startlingly young king smiled easily and indicated a chair.
“Please, do sit. Thank you for coming.”
Fredrik edged toward the chair and sank down, still holding his hat.
The king sat down across from him, and the priestess and the older
man who had accompanied him did likewise. King Anduin folded his
hands and regarded Fredrik steadily but kindly. The older man
crossed his arms and leaned back in his seat. In contrast to the king
and the priestess, he looked almost angry. Fredrik thought him
familiar-looking but couldn’t place him.
“I’m sorry for the mystery of all this, but it’s a bit of a delicate
matter, and I wanted to speak with you myself.”
Fredrik knew his eyes were as big as eggs at that point, but he was
utterly unable to do anything about it. He gulped. Anduin waved to the
attendant nobleman. “Wine for Mr. Farley, please, Count Ridgewell.
Or would you prefer a beer?”
The king of Stormwind is asking me if I want wine or beer, Fredrik
thought. The world had gone mad.
“W-whatever you’re having, Your Majesty.”
“A bottle of Peaked Dalaran Red,” he said, and the count nodded
and left. The king returned his gaze to Fredrik. “You’re an innkeeper.
I’m sure you’ll be familiar with my selection.”
Fredrik was indeed familiar with the vintage, but it wasn’t
something there was much call for in the Lion’s Pride, as the price was
exorbitant. “I’m offering you a glass now because we’re going to toast a
very brave man,” the king continued. “And then I’m going to ask you if
you yourself would, if it were possible, be inclined to do a very brave
thing.”
Fredrik nodded. “Of course, sir. It’s as you wish.”
The priestess placed a gentle hand on his arm. “I know it’s hard not
to be nervous, but I promise you, you’re free to leave at any time. His
Majesty’s request is just that, not an order.”
Fredrik felt some of the trepidation abate, and his heart, which had
been pounding fiercely ever since the courier had arrived at the inn,
finally started to slow down despite the older man’s glower.
“Thank you, Priestess.”
Anduin continued. “It’s my understanding you lost your brother to
the plague. I want you to know that I am truly sorry for your loss.”
This wasn’t at all what Fredrik had been expecting. He felt like he’d
been gut punched. But the young king’s blue eyes remained friendly
and sympathetic, and Fredrik found himself speaking freely.
“Aye,” Fredrik said. “We was close as boys. Frandis always liked to
play with swords. He was good at it—ever so much better’n me. Got a
job guarding supply caravans from ruffians. He would go from here to
Ironforge or wherever the caravans went. That day, they went to
Lordaeron.”
The boy—no, Fredrik, the king!—looked down for a minute. “And
you thought Frandis died, didn’t you?”
Sudden hope seized the innkeeper. “He’s not—is he alive?”
The king shook his blond head sadly. “No. But he eventually became
a Forsaken. And it was as a Forsaken that he became a hero. He was
killed because he defied a tyrant—the warchief of the Horde, Garrosh
Hellscream. He died because he wouldn’t follow orders he knew were
wrong and cruel.”
Count Ridgewell returned, bearing a tray with four glasses and the
promised wine. The king nodded his thanks and filled the glasses.
Fredrik reached for his, careful not to hold the fragile blown glass too
tightly. It was not the heavy mugs he was accustomed to at his tavern,
that was for certain.
Frandis—his brother—had been a Forsaken. Abruptly Fredrik
started to tremble, and the wine sloshed around in the beautiful
goblet. He took a gulp to steady his nerves, then kicked himself for not
savoring the rare vintage.
“A hero,” Fredrik said, repeating King Anduin’s words. “That don’t
sound like a Forsaken,” he added cautiously, wondering if this was
some kind of game.
“Not like what we think of as Forsaken, no,” the woman said. Beside
her, the gray-haired man was looking increasingly irritated.
“But does it sound like Frandis?” the king asked.
Tears shimmered in Fredrik’s eyes. “It do,” he said. “He were a good
man, Your Majesty.”
“I know,” the king said. “And he was a good man even after he died.
There are other Forsaken who also retain themselves even after…their
transition. Not all of them, certainly. But some.”
“It…don’t seem possible,” Fredrik murmured.
“Let me ask you a question,” the king said. “Let’s suppose, by some
chance, Frandis was still with us. As a Forsaken. Knowing that he was
still largely himself, still the good man who was your brother, would
you have liked to meet with him?”
Fredrik dropped his gaze to his lap. He saw that his large, strong
hands had been clutching and twisting his hat until it had completely
lost its shape.
What a question! Would he want that?
“Bear in mind as you answer, this may be your brother—but he
would also be a Forsaken.” For the first time, the older man had
spoken. His voice was deep and had almost a growl to it. “He wouldn’t
be alive. He might be rotting. Bones would likely be jutting through his
skin. He would have done terrible things as a member of the Scourge.
And he would serve the Banshee Queen. Would you still be interested
in meeting your ‘brother’?”
King Anduin did not look pleased with the older man’s words, but
he did not silence him, either. Fredrik felt cold, reeling from the
graphic picture that had been painted. It would be terrifying to come
face to face with—
With what? Or, more important, with who? With a monster? Or
with his brother?
Fredrik would have to find that out for himself, wouldn’t he?
The innkeeper swallowed hard and looked squarely first at the
boyish face of his king, then at the gentle one of the priestess, then,
less willingly, at the almost angry older man.
His answer was for his king.
“Yes, Your Majesty,” he stated. “I’d have wanted to see him. And if
he was as you say he was—someone who tried to stop something evil—
then he’d still be my brother.”
The king and the priestess exchanged pleased glances, and the king
refilled Fredrik’s glass while the older man shook his head and sighed
in frustration.
O
ver the next few days, Anduin and Calia took the list of human
names Sylvanas had given them and dispatched letters to all
those mentioned. Anduin himself wrote them rather than having a
scribe do so. He made it clear that participation in the Gathering, as he
and Calia found themselves calling it, was completely voluntary.
No harm will come to you or your family if you refuse, he said in
the missive. This is not an order but rather an invitation, a chance to
see your loved ones again, although they are dif erent from the ones
you recall.
The couriers delivering the letters had been instructed not to leave
without a reply. Some of those on the list were literate and wrote their
own responses; others dictated them to the courier. Anduin looked at
the pile of responses and sighed. “Counting today’s batch, there are
more refusals than acceptances,” he said.
Calia smiled sadly but kindly. “That shouldn’t surprise you,” she
replied.
“No. It doesn’t.” And that’s why it’s painful, he thought but did not
say.
“But there were some who accepted right away,” she reminded him.
“And every member of the council submitted five names, anticipating
that some might not want to be involved.”
“True.” It was good for him to remember that. Their task was still
just beginning; all the people who did respond positively would have
to be interviewed to ensure that their desire to reunite with family or
friends stemmed from love and concern rather than vengeance. Others
of his advisers had offered to aid Calia and Anduin in the process, but
the young king had refused them. It was a bitter thing, but he didn’t
trust them to be unbiased. He’d seen how unhappy Genn had been
with Fredrik Farley. People needed to understand what they might
encounter, but they didn’t need to be bullied into refusing.
Anduin had been informed that negative sentiment was not limited
to his advisers. Guards and Shaw’s people had reported that there was
muttering in some of the taverns and on the streets. The guards had
been instructed to interrupt such conversations if they verged on
sedition or grew violent. So far, nothing untoward had happened; the
hatred expressed, the guards reported, was toward Sylvanas and the
Horde for what they had done to their loved ones. Some still believed
that death was better than becoming “monsters.”
Communication between himself and the Banshee Queen continued
to go surprisingly well. They had hammered out a set of rules that each
agreed to adhere to and that had even passed muster among his
advisers for safety purposes. Everyone was, if not exactly happy,
approving of the spot selected, the numbers chosen, and the steps that
would be followed from the arrival of each faction’s forces to the time
and manner of their departure.
At one point, Genn had confronted Anduin and asked him point
blank: “How can you work so easily with the creature who betrayed
your father? There’s more blood on her hands than there is water in
the ocean!”
“It’s not easy,” Anduin had replied. “And she does have blood on her
hands. We all do. No, Genn. I can’t change the past. But if this goes
well, then I can change the future: one person, one mind, one heart at
a time. And maybe that will be enough so that a fresh outbreak of war
fueled by Azerite won’t wipe out every one of us.”
The days passed. Anduin and Calia continued to meet with those
whose names were on the provided list. Some were like Fredrik:
individuals who struggled with the concept of a Forsaken as a “person”
but yearned for connection. Others, though they might have expressed
a willingness to meet with their Forsaken kin in the letter, were
deemed unsuitable. Calia was a keen observer, and Anduin trusted the
old injuries he had received from the Divine Bell to guide his
decisions. And sometimes, sadly, it was quite obvious that the
“reunion” would have resulted in violence.
There was an undercurrent of hostility, an unvoiced desire to punish
the Forsaken simply for the act of having died and been reborn.
Others, usually with more than sufficient reason, were openly angry at
Sylvanas. They were given coin and refreshment for their time and
dismissed.
“Hate,” Anduin said once to Calia, “always surprises me. It
shouldn’t. But it does.”
She nodded her golden head sadly. “As priests, we cannot harden
our hearts and still do what the Light would have us do. Vulnerability
is our strength and our weakness both. But I would have it no other
way.”
The candles had burned low in the chamber on the final day as the
last person settled into the chair. Her name was Philia Fintallas, and
the person who had asked for her was her father, Parqual.
Philia looked to be about fifteen years old, if that. She had large,
expressive eyes and a small button nose. With the vibrancy of her
demeanor, she seemed as far removed from a Forsaken as the summer
from the winter.
“My father was a historian in Lordaeron, and I was born there,” she
said. “But we had family here—aunts, uncles, cousins—and I had come
back for a visit. I was supposed to have gone home the day after—” She
broke off, and tears welled in her eyes. Anduin fished out a
handkerchief and handed it to her. She accepted it with a trembling
smile of thanks and sipped at the water Calia had poured for her.
“After Arthas came,” Anduin finished for her. He sneaked a glance at
Calia. He couldn’t count the number of times her brother’s name had
been mentioned during these meetings with survivors. And every one
had cursed him heartily. On some level, it had to wound that man’s
sister. Anduin never identified Calia by name, and she never reacted to
the vile things that were said about the slain Lich King. He admired
her strength, particularly given what she had said about not hardening
her heart.
Philia nodded miserably, then took a deep breath and continued.
“We never heard anything from Mama or Papa, so we assumed they
were dead. Hoped they were dead, given all we had heard about the
Scourge. Oh, isn’t that horrible now that I know—I have to tell you that
my uncle didn’t want me to come when I got your letter, Your Majesty.
But I had to. If by some miracle it’s still him, I have to see him. I have
to see my papa!”
Her voice caught as the tears she had tried so hard to contain spilled
down her cheeks.
Calia had unfailingly been kind and comforting to all she and
Anduin had spoken with, but this girl’s obvious love clearly struck her
powerfully. She rose and went to Philia, holding her tightly, letting her
sob against her shoulder. Anduin thought he glimpsed tears in the
priestess’s eyes as the two women clung to each other, and a thought
struck him. It was a delicate subject but one he needed to broach with
Calia once their task here was completed.
“It’s true, I promise you,” he said to Philia. “I haven’t met your
father, but I have encountered many Forsaken who remember who
they were and who would be very happy to be reunited with those who
have thought them dead or destroyed beyond recognition.”
Calia stood back a step from the girl, placing her hands on her
shoulders. “Philia? Look at me.”
The girl did so, gulping, her eyes red and swollen. “I have heard of
your father from someone who knows him as he is now. He speaks
very highly of him and tells me he is still kind and intelligent. I believe
it will be a joyful reunion for you both.”
“Thank you! Thank you so much! When will this happen?”
“We will send a courier with instructions,” Anduin promised her.
“Hopefully, not too long.”
When the girl left, beaming with joy, Calia gave Anduin a smile even
though her face was still flushed from the empathetic tears she had
shed.
“I hope you see now what good you do, Anduin Wrynn.”
He gave her a lopsided grin. “I hope it will be good,” he said. “I’ll
relax when it’s all over. I couldn’t have done this without you, Calia.
You have a gift for reading people.”
“That was something I learned from an early age as a royal child, as
I’m sure you did. Working so closely with so many fellow priests has
only helped to hone that skill and temper it with compassion.”
There was a pause. Calia herself had just provided him a segue into
the conversation he wished to have with her, but even so, Anduin
steeled himself.
“Calia,” he began carefully, “you have been a tremendous help. And
you aren’t a Stormwind citizen. If this plan does lead eventually to
peace, you’ll be a hero of the Alliance.”
She smiled a touch ruefully. “Thank you, but I don’t consider myself
a member of the Alliance. I’m a citizen of nowhere now except perhaps
the Netherlight Temple,” she said. “I go where the Light wills me. I
truly believe this is the right path toward mending other, greater rifts.”
Anduin couldn’t let it go without making absolutely certain. Too
much was at stake. “The kingdom of Lordaeron is your birthright. Few
would be willing to let go of such a title and the power it would grant
them,” he pressed. “I understand your reasoning, but many do not.
You may have some nationalist champions rising, ready to take the
city in your name.”
Suddenly her expression grew thoughtful, and she searched his eyes.
“Would you be among them, Anduin? Is that why you ask? Would the
king of Stormwind make war on the Horde, scour the Undercity, to
grant the queen of Lordaeron her empty kingdom?”
The throne was hers by every right. Yet was it worth war should she
express a desire to claim it? She saw the struggle on his face and put a
hand on his.
“I understand. Don’t worry. Those who currently inhabit Lordaeron
lived there in life. The Forsaken are the true heirs. It belongs to them
now. The best I can do for those whom I would have ruled is exactly
what I’m doing. I’ve found peace and a calling where I can really
matter. That’s more important than a bloodied crown.”
“Sacrificing peace and a calling is usually the price of a crown,”
Anduin said.
“You have not let it be so. Stormwind is fortunate to have you. But if
you truly wish to thank me, I have a favor to ask. Of both you and the
archbishop. I’d like to participate in the Gathering.”
Anduin frowned slightly. “I don’t think that is wise,” he said. “There
may be those who recognize you. It could be dangerous. It could be…
misconstrued.” It could, in fact, lead to war.
“If any of the Forsaken do recognize me, it will give me the chance to
show that I bear them no ill will,” she countered. “That I have no
desire to run them out of the place that’s been their home for so long. I
want them to stay there. I want them to be safe.”
Anduin watched her carefully, taking a breath and centering
himself. Light—let me know if she means them harm. He felt no
responding ache in his bones, no hint that Calia Menethil was
planning some kind of murderous coup. Her intentions were in
alignment with the Light they both served.
“I’ve already established a bond of trust with these people we’ve
interviewed,” she continued. “And no one knows the archbishop better
than I do.”
This was true. And no one knew her better than Faol. “I will speak
with the archbishop,” Anduin said at last. “If he is agreeable, then I
am, too.”
Calia beamed at him. “Thank you,” she said. “It means more than
you know.”
There was one last thing he felt compelled to say. “I have a question,
and it’s important that I know the answer.”
Her golden hair, as golden as that of Arthas, as golden as his own,
fell in a bright sheet to hide her face as she looked down. Her voice was
small when she spoke.
“I trust you, Anduin,” she said. “If you feel you must know the
answer, then ask it.”
He took a deep breath.
“Calia…Is there a child? Do you have an heir?”
T
he unspoken words hung between them, heavy and sad, and
Anduin knew the answer before she gave it.
“There was a child,” Calia Menethil said so softly that he had to
strain to hear her. It was enough, but Anduin waited to see if she was
ready to tell her story. Just as he drew breath to change the subject,
she began to speak.
“You must understand…my father was ordinarily a kind and
understanding man, but on this one thing he was firm. He was to
choose the man I was to marry, and I was to agree to it.”
Her sorrowful sea-green eyes lifted from the clasped hands in her
lap. “I have made many mistakes and poor choices in my life.
Everyone has, but as royalty, our decisions matter more than those of
others because they affect so many more people. You may feel that you
have to find a queen, have an heir. Your advisers will want you to make
a good political match. Others might be able to live with such things.
But not people like us. Promise me this, Anduin: whatever anyone tells
you to do, don’t marry if your heart doesn’t tell you to.”
Her face was fierce but still beautiful and haunted, and her words
struck him with the power of truth. Even so, Anduin knew that in the
end he would have to do what was best for his kingdom.
“I cannot make a promise I may not be able to keep,” he said, “but
for what it’s worth, I share your feelings on this matter.”
“We all do what we must,” Calia said. “I was not the direct heir. I
don’t have your responsibilities. If I had, I might have agreed without
protest. But Arthas was the heir, the firstborn son, and as he grew up,
Papa began to focus more on him. It seemed as though he and Jaina
would be a perfect couple—a love match as well as a sound political
one. At least until Arthas somehow decided that it wasn’t perfect.”
She paused, then looked up at him. “Jaina…I’ve been afraid to ask
you. Is she…”
“She’s alive,” Anduin hastened to reassure her. “We don’t know
where she is, but she can take care of herself.” He did not tell her of
Jaina’s struggles or of her apparent abandonment of the Alliance.
Calia had enough sorrows on her heart. Anduin had no desire to add to
them unless she inquired.
His words seemed to be enough for her. She smiled, her eyes
distant, and said, “I’m glad. She was dear to me when we were
younger. When the world was less cruel than now. And with what
Arthas…became…I am deeply glad she was not wed to him.
“But while Father’s eye was on my brother, I conducted my own
quiet rebellion. I fell in love with someone Father never would have
approved of: one of the footmen. We stole what moments we could,
and once, in the dark of night, we slipped away and begged a priestess
to marry us. She refused at first, but we persisted. We came to her
again and again, my sweet love and I, and at last, with the Light’s
blessing, we were wed.”
Her hand fell to her belly, flat now but once rounded with child.
“When I was certain that I was carrying, I confided in Mother. Oh, she
was furious with me! But she could tell by my face that this was a true
love, and I assured her my child would be legitimate. Father was too
caught up in Arthas to make much objection when my mother and I
went on a ‘long rest’ to more remote parts of the kingdom.”
Calia’s hand ceased to move on her abdomen, and both hands curled
into fists. “I got to hold my beautiful little girl and tend to her for a few
weeks before it was decided that my husband would raise her, away
from Lordaeron and ignorant of her birthright. Mother promised that
when the time was right—when Arthas had finally married and
produced an heir—we could acknowledge my daughter and perhaps
elevate my husband to a nobleman’s status so that her name would be
unsullied.
“That day never came. But the Scourge did.”
Anduin listened, his heart full of sympathy. Calia was describing
being sold off like livestock to the highest bidder. She’d rebelled, fallen
in love, and conceived a child. A daughter. For a brief moment, Anduin
wondered what a daughter or a son of his would look like. Regardless
of appearance or gender, that babe would rule one day…and until then
would be deeply loved.
“I don’t remember much of that time. I remember lying in a ditch
while the Scourge passed above me. I believe to this day it was thanks
to the Light that they never found me. I made my way to Southshore,
where my husband and child had been hidden away. We all three wept
when we were reunited. But it was not to last.”
No. Not a second time. Anduin reached for one of her fisted hands.
For a moment, it was tense beneath his, and then, slowly, the fist
unclenched as Calia allowed her fingers to entwine with his.
“You don’t have to say anything else, Calia. I’m sorry I troubled
you.”
“It’s all right,” she said. “I’ve started now. I think I want to finish.”
“Only if you wish,” he assured her.
She gave him a faint smile. “Maybe if I tell someone, the nightmares
will stop.”
Inwardly, he winced; he had no response to that. She continued. “No
one recognized me. Everyone assumed I was dead. We were happy for
a time. And then came the blight. We ran. I wasn’t about to leave my
family again, but in the crowd we were separated. I stood in the middle
of the street, screaming for them. Someone took pity on me, pulling
me onto his horse and galloping past the limits of the town barely in
time.
“There was a cluster of refugees in the forest. So many of us waited,
desperate for word of our loved ones. Sometimes prayers were
answered, and there were reunions that were…” Calia bit her lip. “I
prayed that my family, too, would be spared. But…” Her voice trailed
off. “I never saw them again.”
And then, with a realization that stopped his breathing with shock,
Anduin understood why Calia had decided to befriend the Forsaken.
Why, instead of seeing them as the destroyers of her city, her way of
life, and all her family, she had chosen to identify with them.
“You’re hoping that your husband and child, too, became Forsaken
instead of dying as Scourge,” he said softly. “You’re hoping you’ll get
word of them at the Gathering.”
Calia nodded, wiping at the tears on her face with one hand. The
other remained clasped with the young king’s. “Yes,” she said. “It
wasn’t until I met the archbishop that I started to understand that the
Forsaken weren’t monsters. They were just…us. The same people you
and I would be if we had been killed and given a different sort of life.”
“You don’t know if your family would have been like that,” Anduin
cautioned. “They could have been driven mad or turned cruel. It might
be devastating for you to see them.” Genn’s words to Fredrik came
back to him now even as he spoke.
“I know. But I have to hold out for the chance. Isn’t that what the
Light is all about, Anduin? Hope?”
Anduin’s mind went back to the trial of Garrosh Hellscream. When
that orc had executed his escape, he had done so thanks to the chaos
sown by an unexpected attack on the temple. In that battle, Jaina had
been severely wounded.
No, he corrected himself. She had been dying.
So many tried to heal her, both Alliance and Horde. But the wound
was too much. Anduin remembered kneeling on the cold stone floor of
the temple, watching Jaina’s labored breathing and seeing red bubbles
form on her lips, his hands on her bloodied robe. Please, please, he
had prayed, and the Light had come. But he, like the others, was
exhausted. And the Light he had called would not be enough to save
her.
He remembered others telling him to come away, that he’d done all
he could. But he stayed there in those bleak, impotent moments before
the death of this woman he’d loved as an aunt. No, he had told those
who wanted him to walk away. I can’t.
And then the voice of his teacher—Chi-Ji, the Red Crane. And so, the
student remembers the lessons of my temple.
Anduin quoted Chi-Ji’s words to Calia now. “Hope is what you have
when all other things have failed you,” he said. “Where there is hope,
you make room for healing, for all things that are possible—and some
that are not.”
Her eyes shone, and she gave him a tremulous smile. “You
understand,” she said.
“I do,” he said. “And I know that having you participate in the
Gathering is the right thing to do.” As he spoke, he felt warmth and
calmness steal through him. That warmth passed through their
clasped hands to Calia, and he saw the lines around her eyes and
mouth lessen, her body relax.
Whatever betided, this act of kindness was the right thing. Anduin
had to hope that they would not pay too dear a price for it.
TANARIS
The team of goblin engineer and gnome mineralogist picked up their
pace. Saffy grilled Grizzek on everything he knew about his “boss,” and
it killed him to watch her face, normally so bright and cheerful—
especially recently—grow darker and more withdrawn. Sometimes
Grizzek bridled at how his people were regarded or, more accurately,
reviled. Not all goblins were out to sell dangerous things at ludicrous
prices. There were some who were even well regarded: Gazlowe, who
operated out of Ratchet, south of Orgrimmar, came to mind.
But Jastor Gallywix epitomized the worst that could possibly be said
about goblins. He was cunning, selfish, arrogant, completely ruthless,
and unburdened by remorse. He’d even sold his own people into
slavery right after the Cataclysm hit, for crying out loud. Grizzek and
his darling Punkin had become so engrossed in the breathtaking
magnificence of Azerite that they’d lost sight of what surely was at the
heart of Gallywix’s desire to learn about it: its ability to kill anyone
that goblin chose.
“This is all my fault,” Grizzek said at one point, more miserable than
he’d ever been in his life. “I should never have trusted Gallywix to keep
his promise. Should have known he’d want me to make weapons. And
worst of all, I should never have dragged you into this. I’m so sorry.”
“Hey,” Saffy said, slipping into his arms and snuggling against his
sunken green chest. “While I cannot approve of your methods, I’m
glad we’re working together on this. You were right. You knew I’d want
to be involved. I may have come here kicking and screaming—literally
—but I stayed because I wanted to. And because—”
Grizzek caught his breath. Was she going to say—
“Because I’m glad that we found each other again. This Azerite is
powerful stuff. Its natural state is toward growth and healing. Maybe
even Gallywix will understand that it’s much better to put it to those
kinds of uses.”
“Pookie,” he said, “he’s a goblin. We like to blow things up.”
She was, of course, unable to deny the truth in this. “Well,” she
hemmed, “building and healing are just as important as destroying
and killing.”
Sapphronetta was so naive. And he loved her so much for it.
By the time Gallywix showed up, all big belly, big attitude, and big
smiles, they were ready.
“Trade Prince,” Grizzek said, “please allow me to introduce my lab
partner: Sapphronetta Flivvers.”
Saffy dropped a curtsy, which looked ridiculous but endearing as she
was wearing overalls and clunky boots. Gallywix appeared charmed.
“Delighted, delighted,” he boomed in his abrasive, raspy voice,
taking her hand and pressing his lips on it. Saffy turned pale but did
not pull away. “You were worth every copper to kidnap, my dear, and I
haven’t even seen your work yet.”
“Uh…thanks,” she said. Her eyes narrowed, and it was obvious she
wanted nothing more than to deck him, but again she refrained from
actions that probably would result in their imprisonment and/or
execution.
“We’ve been working on a variety of things,” Grizzek began, but
Gallywix cut him off.
“Lots of weapons, I hope,” Gallywix said as he trundled through the
door into the courtyard. “Our warchief is extremely interested in
things that go boom. And I told her, ‘Warchief,’ I says, ‘don’t you
worry, honey. I got the best guy who makes things go boom.’ ”
“Actually,” Saffy said, forcing a smile, “goblins already excel at
making things go boom. What we’ve been working on is much more
valuable.”
They led him inside to the lab. Arranged with an eye to impress were
all their labors of love. They proceeded to put the items through their
paces as Gallywix watched, his tiny eyes fixed hungrily on the Azerite.
First they shared the wearable items: the jewelry and trinkets. “We
got our inspiration from you,” Grizzek said. “Your cane was the very
first adornment made of Azerite!” Gallywix beamed and petted the
glowing golden orb under discussion. Saffy discussed the properties of
the various trinkets, and Grizzek brought out the armor they’d crafted.
“Holy smokes,” Gallywix exclaimed as he watched the armor take
minute after minute of direct fire from the Lightning Blast 3000. Next
up was Crunchy’s demonstration. Grizzek had rebuilt the damaged
hand and winced afresh as yet again it was destroyed when the
modified shredder tried to crush a lump of Azerite.
“My, my!” Gallywix said. “That’s tough stuff.”
“Think of the building material you could make from it,” Saffy said.
“It would withstand fires, earthquakes—”
“Think of the shredders we could make!”
“Er…yes. Let’s move on.” Next, Saffy demonstrated what Grizzek
referred to as her “best parlor trick” of neutralizing poison and licking
it off her hand.
“You won’t need to craft specific antidotes,” she said. “Just carry
around some of this and keep it liquid, and no matter the poison, it’s
no longer a problem!”
“Ha ha! When we use it, poison is never a problem!” All of
Gallywix’s chins and his belly, too, jiggled with his guffaws.
Grizzek was starting to feel sick to his stomach. His poor Saffy was
looking as if she felt the same way.
By the end of the demonstrations, Gallywix was not looking very
happy. “I asked you for weapons,” he said. “Specifically. By name.”
“Ah, yeah,” Grizzek said. “About that. We, ah—”
“Some things could be modified into weapons,” Saffy said, startling
Grizzek. “But I highly urge you not to do so. What we’ve shown you
could save lives. Horde lives.” That admission was hard for her, but
she persevered. “You can build structures that the Alliance can’t
attack. You can extend lives, heal wounds, save people who otherwise
might have died. This helps the Horde. You don’t need weapons.”
Gallywix sighed and looked at Saffy with an expression that was
almost kind and nearly respectful.
“You’re a cutie and a smarty,” he said, “so I’ll tell you nicely. We’re
in a world that’s always going to be at war, sweet cheeks, and the only
ones who survive it are the ones with the biggest weapons. Grizzek
here understands. You gnomes seem to have problems with that
concept. Sure, sure, this Azerite does all the things you say it’s gonna
do. We will make buildings, and cure sickness, and save lives. But we
are also going to grind the Alliance down beneath our heels, and, Miss
Smarty-Pants, you need to decide if you’re gonna be on the winning
side when that all goes down. Believe me when I say I hope so.”
He looked at Grizzek, stabbing a finger at him to punctuate the
words. “Weapons. Pronto.”
Then he tipped his hideous hat to Saffy and waddled out.
For several long moments, neither Grizzek nor Saffy spoke. Then,
quietly, Saffy said, “What he’s going to do with the Azerite…those will
be crimes against gnomanity. And humanity, and goblins, and orcs,
and everyone. Everyone, Grizzy.”
“I know,” he said just as quietly.
“And we will have made it possible for him to do it.”
Grizzek was silent. He knew that, too.
She turned to him, her eyes wide and shimmering with tears.
“Azerite is part of Azeroth. We can’t let him do that to her. We can’t let
him do that to us. Somehow we’ve got to stop him.”
“We can’t stop him, Saffy,” Grizzek replied. His eyes roamed the
magnificent things the two of them had made out of their passion for
science and tinkering—and for each other. All of them made his heart
swell with pride and then ache with terror for how they would be used.
She came to him and started weeping softly. He put his arms around
her, trying to hold her tight enough to shut out the pain of their
complicity.
Then a thought occurred to him. “We can’t stop him,” he repeated,
“but I think I have a plan on how we can stop something.”
“T
hank you for coming,” Anduin said to his guests. “I know the
hour is late, but it is important.”
“So your letter said,” Turalyon replied. It was indeed late, well past
midnight, but the young king suspected that neither Greymane nor
Turalyon had yet seen his bed. Too much was going on.
The king had requested their presences in the Cathedral of Light. A
few acolytes and novices moved about even at this hour, but most of
the priests were gone. He awaited them at the narthex of the cathedral
and indicated that they should join him as he walked down the aisle
toward the altar.
“I wanted to give you an update on where we stand for the
Gathering,” Anduin said.
They frowned, exchanging glances. “Your Majesty,” Genn said, “we
have already given you our opinion on this.”
“We have,” Turalyon said. “With respect, Your Majesty, we have a
fundamental disagreement on the Light’s intentions and purpose.” He
hesitated. “I do not condemn you for your feelings. It would not be the
first time a devotee has misunderstood the Light. I know I have. I
don’t claim to be perfect or to have a true comprehension of it. No one
can.”
“But you both do feel that this is wrong?” Anduin pressed. “That
there is nothing to be gained by having Forsaken and humans meeting
when a prior bond had existed between them?”
“We have made that clear, Your Majesty,” Turalyon stated. “If you
have bidden us to come here at this hour simply to rehash this
argument with you—”
“No,” Anduin said. “Not with me.”
“With me,” came a rich, warm, oddly echoing voice.
They turned around.
Archbishop Alonsus Faol stood on the blue steps leading up to the
altar.
He was clad in a miter and robe that bespoke his stature in life.
Anduin had looked diligently for the garments. It was, he had realized,
easier for humans to recognize the outer trappings of an archbishop
than what remained of the man himself.
Both Greymane and Turalyon seemed stunned. Anduin waited but
did not speak. This had to unfold between Faol and his oldest, dearest
friends without interference from outsiders. Anduin said a silent
prayer that everyone in this room would look with eyes of remembered
friendship and see truly.
“I’m quite aware that I don’t look as you remember me,” Faol
continued. “But I think you recognize my voice. And my face is mostly
intact, though it lacks that bushy white beard I was so fond of.”
Turalyon went as still as if he were the statue that stood at the
entrance to Stormwind. The only thing that proved he was not was the
rapid fall and rise of his chest. The expression on his face was one of
utter loathing, but he did not speak or move.
If Turalyon’s reaction was cold, Genn’s was pure fire. He whirled on
Anduin, his face contorted in fury. Not for the first time, the young
king was aware of the sheer power of the man even when he wasn’t in
his worgen form. He needed no claws and teeth, not even a sword, to
kill. And right now, he looked as though he was about to rip Anduin
apart with his bare hands.
“You’ve gone too far, Anduin Wrynn,” Greymane snarled. “How dare
you bring this thing into the Cathedral of Light! You’re chasing this
distorted ideal of what peace really is. And now you’ve brought that
here.”
His voice shook. “Alonsus Faol was my friend. He was Turalyon’s
friend. We’d accepted that he was gone. He was buried at Faol’s Rest.
Why are you doing this to us?”
Anduin didn’t flinch. He had been expecting this reaction. When he
got no response, Greymane turned on the source of his loathing.
“Have you got the boy under some sort of spell, wretch?” he
bellowed. “I know that there are priests who can do that sort of thing.
Let Anduin go, get out of here, and I will not rip that putrid corpse of
yours to shreds.
“You chose this…this shambling existence. You chose to be this
creature of nightmares. And you have to know what’s happened to me.
To my people. What yours did to me and how much I loathe what
you’ve become. If you had any decency, any respect for those you once
called friends, you’d have hurled yourself into the fire during your first
Hallow’s End and spared us all this!”
Anduin closed his eyes in pain at the vitriol Greymane was hurling
at a man he’d loved in life. He had known this would be difficult, but
he had not expected Genn to be so malicious in his anger.
Faol, though, seemed completely unsurprised by the reaction and
looked at Genn sadly. “You stand there, a few strides away from an old
friend, and you attack me with words chosen for their power to
wound,” Faol said. “And I know why you do so.”
“I do so because you are a monstrosity! Because your people are an
abomination and should never have been created!”
Faol shook his head. His voice remained calm, tinged with a hint of
sorrow. “No, my old friend. You do this because you are afraid.”
Anduin blinked, shocked. Genn Greymane was many things, but he
was no coward. Anduin did not want to interfere, but if it looked like
Faol was in danger, he would do so. Although Faol was probably a
more powerful priest, even in his present state, than Anduin could
ever be.
Greymane stood absolutely still. “I’ve killed for lesser insults than
that.” The words were pitched low, a growl.
“I know that,” Faol continued. “And yet I say again: you are afraid.
Oh, not of me personally.” He put a withered hand on his bony chest.
“I’m certain you believe you can take me in one of your heartbeats.
You may be right at that, but I’d just as soon not find out.”
He shook his head sadly. “No, Genn Greymane. You’re afraid
because you believe that if you acknowledge here, now, with me, that
Forsaken aren’t irredeemable monsters—if you show any hint of
understanding, or kindness, or compassion, or friendship—then that
will mean your son died for nothing.”
A human cry of rage and pain turned into a wolf’s howl as the
Gilnean king arched his back. His form shifted, wreathed in mystical
smoke as gray as the wolf’s pelt. Taller, much more massive, he
crouched on his lupine haunches and prepared to spring at Faol.
Turalyon seized the worgen by the arm, shaking his head.
“No bloodshed in this place,” he said.
“The creature doesn’t even have blood,” Genn snarled, his voice
deep and ragged. “He’s tied together like a stick puppet with ichor and
magic!”
“I know something about loss,” the archbishop continued. Anduin
marveled at Faol’s calmness. “And I know something about you, too.
You’ve held fast to that pain. It’s served you well. It’s enabled you to
fight with unbridled ferocity. But like any edged weapon, it can cut
both ways. And right now, it’s coming between you and an
understanding that could change your world.”
“I can’t change my world!” Genn cried in a broken voice. The words
were still blazing with fury, but shot through them was a deep thread
of pain that made Anduin’s heart ache. “I want my son back, but that
banshee murdered him! She and her kind—your kind—nearly
destroyed my people!”
“Yet here you are,” Faol continued almost placidly. “Many of you are
still healthy. Strong. Alive.” For the first time since this confrontation
began, the undead priest stepped forward. “Answer me this, old friend.
If I had not come alone—if I had brought Liam with me, raised, as I
was, and still himself, as I am—would your answer be different?”
The worgen jerked back at words that pierced him more than any
blade. He panted, his ears flattened to the back of his skull, his tail
lashing the air. Anduin, himself reeling from the shock of the
archbishop’s words, lifted his hands, cupping them in preparation for
the Light. But before he could act, Greymane howled in fury, dropped
to all fours—and raced from the room.
Anduin started to go after him, but Faol stopped him. “Let him go,
Anduin. Genn Greymane ever had a temper, and now he’s been forced
to look at something sad and ugly within himself. He’ll either come
around in his own time or he won’t. But now, whatever he says, he has
realized he cannot tar us all with the same brush. It’s a small victory,
but I will accept it.”
“Victory.”
The single word was laced with more icy abhorrence than Anduin
had ever heard, so filled with disgust that it physically hurt him. In the
tense moments with Genn, he had almost forgotten the silent paladin.
The two men had reacted differently but with the same repellence.
Turalyon had no sword and wore no armor. Yet he still loomed large
and powerful in the cathedral as he straightened to his full height. If
Genn had been racked by anguished fury, Turalyon, one of the first
paladins of the Silver Hand, was brimming with righteous rage.
“You blaspheme what was once a good man,” he snapped. “You have
stolen his form and parade him about, wearing him as if he were a suit
of clothing. Your broken mouth is good for nothing save spewing filthy
lies. The undead are unholy. Whatever priestly powers they have come
from the shadows of the Light, not the Light itself. If there is anything
left in you of that good, kindly man I loved so much, you capering
piece of carnage, come to me, and I will blast him into merciful
oblivion.”
How could Turalyon not see what Anduin saw? The high exarch had
embraced a redeemed dreadlord as a companion and fellow soldier!
The young king, too, had been initially horrified. But although the
legendary paladin doubtless had encountered more dark things,
including truly evil Forsaken, than Anduin ever would, Varian’s son
had seen courage displayed by one of Sylvanas’s creations. He held fast
to the memory of witnessing Frandis Farley murdered for daring to
oppose unnecessary cruelty and violence. He recalled Elsie’s letter,
how it had nearly broken his heart. He had seen things Turalyon, in
his thousand years of war against the Legion, had never witnessed.
And now Turalyon was refusing to see something—someone—who
stood right in front of him.
“I created the Order of the Silver Hand,” Faol admonished him, his
voice growing stronger. “I saw in you something that no one else had.
You were a fine priest, but that wasn’t what the Light wanted you to
be. The Light needed champions who could fight with both the
weapons of humanity and the love and power of the Light. The others
were strongest with the first and came to the Light later. You were the
opposite. They were good, fine men. They were noble paladins. But
they are all gone, and you have become the high exarch of the Light.
You are too wise, Turalyon, to deny the truth. Deny that and you deny
the Light itself.”
To Anduin’s horror, Faol closed the distance between himself and
the paladin. He spread his arms open wide. Turalyon trembled and his
fists clenched, but he did not strike.
“Look for the Light in me,” Faol instructed. “You will find it. And if
you do not, then I do beg of you to strike me down, for I would not
wish to exist as a broken corpse the Light had abandoned.”
Anduin looked down to see that Calia had stepped beside him. She
looked up at him, and he saw that she was afraid for her friend. He
was, too, even though he had met the archbishop only recently.
All will be as the Light wills it, he thought.
For a moment, Anduin thought the paladin so enraged that he
wouldn’t even try. But then Turalyon lifted an arm. A ray of what
looked like pure golden sunlight, impossible at this hour of night when
that orb hid its head, shone down upon both forms.
Turalyon’s face was hard as stone. It was the unforgiving expression
of the righteous doing what they deemed to be the right thing. But
then, as Anduin watched, transfixed by the silent struggle going on
between belief and faith, that granite visage softened. Turalyon’s eyes
widened; then the radiant, golden glow that enveloped both the living
and the dead caught the glitter of unshed tears. Joy spread across his
face, and then, as Anduin watched, moved beyond the ability to speak,
Turalyon, paladin of the Silver Hand, high exarch of the Army of the
Light, dropped to his knees.
“Your Excellency,” he breathed. “Forgive me, my old friend. My
arrogance blinded me to what was clear all along had I looked with the
right eyes.”
And he bent his head for the archbishop’s blessing.
Faol, too, was struggling with emotion. “Dear boy,” he said in a voice
that shook, “dear boy. There is nothing to forgive. There was a time
when I would have agreed with you. You are the sole living member of
the original order, the last of the only sons I would ever have. I am
grateful that I have not lost you, too, not to death, or the Void, or to
your own limitations.”
He placed his hand, decaying and lifeless, upon the paladin’s graygold head. Turalyon closed his eyes in quiet joy.
“My blessing, such as it is, is upon you. There is no one, living, dead,
or anywhere in the mysterious shades in between, who cannot benefit
from always looking with eyes, heart, and mind wide open. Rise, my
dear boy, and lead even better now that you have greater
understanding of the ways of the Light.”
Turalyon did so, appearing clumsy for a moment before
straightening. He looked over at Anduin. “I owe you an apology as
well,” he said. “I thought of you as someone who hoped for the best at
the cost of wisdom. I could not have been more wrong.”
Anduin heard Calia sigh deeply with relief. “There is no need,” he
replied. “We are taught to fear the Forsaken. And even the archbishop
understands that there are many whose rebirth turned them cold and
cruel. But not all.”
“No,” Turalyon agreed. “Not all. I am overjoyed to have my old
friend and mentor back.”
“We will work together,” Faol assured him.
“If only Greymane could have witnessed this,” Calia said.
“Like all people, he will see when he is ready,” Turalyon said. “I will
certainly reassure him as best I can. But for now, let me do what I can
to aid you. Others should be able to have the gift that the archbishop
and I have received this night.”
Anduin smiled. He could not see the future. But he could see this
moment, and his heart was full. “I will accept your aid most gladly.”
“Y
a know,” Grizzek observed as he and Saffy prepared their
escape, “life with you is never dull.”
“We do keep hopping, don’t we?” she replied, and gave him a look
that turned his heart all gooey-melty.
Grizzek, not being a complete idiot, had anticipated that at some
point, someone who did not wish him sunshine and rainbows and a
long happy life might come knocking. He had prepared for the
eventuality by digging out—well, by modifying a second shredder to
dig out, actually—a tunnel that opened up into a random spot in
Tanaris. After Gallywix had departed, they’d decided to make a run for
it. They packed up what they could take with them in the little mining
cart, including a few airtight casks of Azerite, and everything else…
well, some of it couldn’t be destroyed, but they’d dismantled what they
could.
The bomb set to detonate an hour after they left also would help.
All their notes were coming with them. They’d programmed
Feathers to fly to Teldrassil with a warning about what had happened
and a plea for rescue at a specific location. They would offer the
Alliance what they had discovered on the stipulation that they would
be creating only things that could help, not harm.
It was a risk. A crazy, glorious one, but it was the only option they
had. Neither, they had decided, could live with knowing their
discoveries were going to be used to kill so effectively.
Just before they left, Grizzek took a long last look around. “I’m
gonna miss this place,” he admitted.
“I know, Grizzy,” Saffy said, her big eyes filled with sympathy. “But
we’ll find another lab. One where we can create to our hearts’ content.”
He turned to her. “Anywhere in the world. Just so long as it’s with
you.” Then, as her eyes widened with shock, he knelt in front of her.
“Sapphronetta Flivvers…will you marry me? Again?”
In his large green hand, he held one of the Azerite rings they had
created. The base was rough because neither of them was a jeweler,
and the Azerite was an imperfect drop that had been allowed to
harden. But when Saffy said, “Oh! Grizzy, yes!” and he slipped it on
her teeny tiny finger, he thought it was the most beautiful ring in the
world.
He embraced her tightly. “I am one happy goblin,” he said, kissing
the top of her head. “Come on, Punkin. Let’s head out on our next
adventure.”
They descended into the tunnel. “I hope it hasn’t caved in,” Grizzek
said. “Haven’t checked in a couple of years.”
“I guess we’ll find out,” Sapphronetta said grimly.
It was a long underground trek from Grizzek’s lab to the hills that
separated Tanaris from Thousand Needles, where Grizzek promised
Saffy they would emerge. Along the way, they talked openly for the
first time. About how much they cared about each other and always
had. About what they’d done wrong and how they felt they’d been
wronged. Over meals, they analyzed what had worked this time that
hadn’t worked the last time. And when they slept, they did so snuggled
close together.
There were no cave-ins, fortunately. And finally, the pair reached
the end of this phase of their journey. “According to my calculations,
it’s about midnight,” Saffy said. Grizzek believed her.
“Perfect,” Grizzek said. “It’s a pretty remote location, but even so, I’d
like to not pop out of this hole in broad daylight. How did you gnomes
ever stand living underground, Saffy? I’m going bonkers without
sunshine.”
“There’s sunshine out there,” Saffy assured him.
“But we’ll be living with night elves.”
“They get sunshine in Teldrassil, too; they just prefer to sleep
through it.”
“You Alliance people are very strange.” He kissed her. “But cute.
Definitely cute.”
Grizzek had left a ladder at the end, and he climbed up first and
undid the latch. “Look out below,” he called down.
“Huh?” Then: “Hey!”
“I covered it with sand,” he explained as the yellow grains poured
down over them. He didn’t mind. Freedom and a life with the gnome
he’d given his heart to years ago awaited him above. He wiped off his
face and clambered up the rest of the way, sticking his head up and
blinking even in the faint light of the moons and the stars.
Nothing looked out of the ordinary. Grizzek cocked his head,
listening. He heard nothing. “Okay, I think we’re good,” he said, and
hoisted himself up onto the ground. He extended a hand to help Saffy
out. They stood, stretched, and grinned at each other.
“Phase one complete,” he said. “I’ll go back down and bring up the
rest of our stuff.”
“Actually,” came a voice, “that won’t be necessary.”
They whirled. A large goblin was silhouetted against the starstudded sky. Grizzek knew that voice. He reached out for Saffy’s hand
and clutched it tightly.
“Druz, you and I always got along okay. Tell you what. I’ll come back
and work for Gallywix. No more tricks. I’ll do whatever he wants. You
can take everything we got. Just let Saffy have some food and water
and let her go.”
“Grizzy—”
“I ain’t letting you die, Saffy,” Grizzek said. “We got a deal, Druz?”
Druz climbed down, followed by no fewer than three other large,
irritated-looking goblins. “Sorry, pal. We’ve been on to you this whole
time. Within five minutes of you hopping down into your hole, we’d
deactivated the bomb you set to go off in your lab. And as for your
parrot, we shot it out of the sky. We just need what you took, and
then…” He shrugged.
“You’re not just going to kill us? In cold blood?” Saffy stammered.
Druz looked at her and sighed. “Little lady, your sweetheart here
knew what he was getting you into. This comes directly from the boss.
It’s outta my hands.”
The other goblins leaped forward, grabbing both Grizzek and Saffy
roughly. Grizzek made a fist and slammed it into the belly of the
nearest one. He heard a yelp and a growl from Saffy and figured she’d
gotten in a good blow of some sort, too. But any resistance on their
part was but a gesture. Within a handful of minutes, the goblin and the
gnome had been searched, slapped around a bit, and then tied up back
to back. Even their feet were bound.
“Hey, Druz! I got some notes off the gnome,” one said.
“Good job, Kezzig,” Druz said.
“This is dumb, Druz,” Grizzek muttered through a mouthful of blood
and broken teeth. “And you ain’t dumb. I’m worth a lot more to you
alive than dead.”
“Not really,” Druz said. “We got all the things you made back in the
lab. We got all the things you tried to steal. And now we got the
gnome’s notes. We can take it from here. You’re too great a risk.”
“Hold me hostage,” Saffy piped up. “You’ll guarantee he won’t
escape.”
“Saffy, shut up!” Grizzek hissed angrily. “Tryin’ to save you here!”
“I got my orders,” Druz said, sounding almost apologetic. “You
ticked off the boss, and this is what we’ve been told to do with you.” He
nodded to Kezzig. “Set the bomb.”
“Wh-what?” Back to back with Saffy as he was, Grizzek couldn’t see
her. But she sounded pale.
“You try to blow up our stuff, we blow you up. Smaller bomb,
though.” Kezzig approached and shoved something cold and hard
between the bound pair. “Sorry it didn’t work out, Grizz. Look at it this
way: it’ll be fast. It didn’t have to be.”
And they walked away, laughing and talking.
Grizzek analyzed the situation. It was not good. He and Saffy were
sitting back to back, tied together tightly with what felt like sturdy
rope. Their hands were bound, presumably so that they would not be
able to work them free and thus untie themselves.
“Think maybe if we wriggle, we can scoot away from it?”
Saffy. Always thinking. Despite the awfulness of the situation,
Grizzek felt himself smiling.
“Worth a shot,” he said, though he didn’t add that it might cause the
bomb to go off immediately. She probably knew that anyway. “Count
of three, scoot to the left. Ready?”
“Yeah.”
“One…two…three…scoot!” They moved about six inches to the left
along the uneven surface of the narrow trail. The bomb was still
wedged solidly between them. “That’s not going to work. Punkin, can
you get to your feet?”
“I—I think so,” she said.
On the count of three, they tried that. They toppled over to the right
the first time. They attempted it a second time once they’d
straightened up. Grizzek’s foot turned on a loose stone, and they went
down again.
“One, two, three!” Grizzek said again, and then, with a grunt, they
were standing.
The bomb was still wedged tightly between them. “Okay, Pookie, it’s
not gonna drop out on its own. We gotta shake it loose.”
“You’re the explosives expert, but I cannot imagine that would be
productive to keeping a bomb unexploded.”
“I think it’s the only chance we got.”
“Me, too.”
Again, on the count of three, they began jumping up and down.
Disbelieving, Grizzek felt the bomb shift. It had been pressing, silently
threatening, against his lower back. Now it was at his tailbone.
“It’s working!” Saffy squeaked.
“I think it is,” Grizzek replied, trying not to be too hopeful. They
kept jumping. The bomb slipped lower, lower…
And then Grizzek no longer felt the pressure. He braced himself for
what he secretly thought was inevitable: detonation on contact with
the ground.
But their luck seemed to be holding. He heard it plop on the sand
but nothing else. “We did it!” Saffy cried happily. “Grizzy, we—”
“Quiet for a sec,” Grizzek said. Saffy obeyed. Grizzek closed his eyes
sickly.
In the silence of the desert night, he could hear the tick-tick. The
bomb was on a timer.
“We ain’t out of this yet,” he said. “Hop to the right and keep
hopping.”
“For how long?”
“Till we reach Gadgetzan.”
They hopped. Even as he believed the bomb was ticking away their
lives second by second, Grizzek marveled at what they had done
together. Even now, they were working together in perfect
coordination. The clichéd well-oiled machine.
“Grizzy?”
“Yeah?” Hop. Hop. Hop.
“I have a confession.”
“What’s that, Pookie?”
“I didn’t tell you something I did because I thought you’d be angry
with me.” Hop. Hop. They were three yards away from it now. If only
they both had longer legs—
“Can’t be angry with you for anything now, Punkin.”
“I burned the notes.”
Grizzek was so shocked that he almost stumbled, but he managed to
keep their rhythm.
“You…what?”
“I tore out all our notes and burned them.” Hop. Hop. “There’s no
way Gallywix can re-create our experiments. He has a few prototypes
and a couple of already-mixed potions, but that’s it. Whatever awful
thing he intends to do with Azerite, it won’t be on us.”
Hop. Hop.
“Saffy…aw, you’re a genius!”
At that moment, Grizzek’s left foot turned on a slippery sandcovered stone, and he heard something snap. They toppled over, and
this time, he knew with sick horror that he was not going to be able to
get back up. Lying facedown in the sand, he couldn’t determine how
much distance they’d put between them and the bomb, and in the
darkness, he hadn’t been able to identify the kind of explosive Druz
had wedged between them. Were they far enough away to survive if it
went off?
He gritted his teeth against the pain as he said, “Saffy, my ankle’s
snapped. We gotta crawl, okay?”
He heard her gulp. “Okay,” she said bravely, though her voice
quavered.
“Roll over so we’re both on our left sides; that way I can push with
my good leg.”
They did and started squirming away. “Grizzy!” Saffy gasped as she
panted, “I still have the ring! My engagement ring!”
The ring, made of commonplace ugly metal. And adorned with a
small golden, glowing drop of Azerite.
“It might be enough to protect us!” she said.
“It might at that,” Grizzek said. Hope, dizzying and wonderful,
flowed through him, and he began squirming in earnest. “I got a
confession to make too, Punkin.”
“Whatever it is, I forgive you.”
He licked his lips. All these years, he’d never said it. Wasted, stupid
years. But all that was gonna change, starting now.
“Sapphronetta Flivvers…I lo—”
The bomb exploded.
A
nduin stood atop the ruined ramparts of Stromgarde Keep. The
wind that stirred his fair hair was damp and cool, and the
overcast sky did little to dispel the sense of sorrow that permeated this
place.
The Arathi Highlands were a part of Azeroth rich in both human and
Forsaken history. Here, the mighty city of Strom once had stood, and
before it, the empire of Arathor, which had given birth to humanity.
The ancient Arathi had been a race of conquerors, but they had
recognized the wisdom in extending cooperation, peace, and equality
to the vanquished tribes. Those qualities had made humanity strong.
Those ancient tribes of the Eastern Kingdoms had joined together,
succeeding in carving out a nation that had changed the world.
Here, too, was the birthplace of magic for humanity, a gift from the
beleaguered high elves of Quel’Thalas in exchange for the aid of
Strom’s mighty army against their common foe, the trolls. All the
major human nations had been settled by those who left Arathor:
Dalaran, founded by the first magi instructed by the elves, as well as
Lordaeron, Gilneas, and later Kul Tiras and Alterac. Those who stayed
behind had built the fortress on which the king of Stormwind now
stood.
He heard the sound of boots on stone and turned to regard Genn.
The older man stepped beside him, his eyes roaming thoughtfully over
the landscape of pine trees and rolling green hills.
“The last time I stood here,” Genn said, “Gilneas was a powerful
nation and Stromgarde’s star was waning. Now both kingdoms lie in
ruins. This one’s home only to criminals, ogres, and trolls. And mine is
home to them.”
He pointed across the rolling fields to the gray stone of what was
known as Thoradin’s Wall. Anduin, Greymane, Turalyon, Velen, Faol,
and Calia, along with exactly two hundred of Stormwind’s finest, had
arrived a few hours earlier from Stormwind Harbor. It had been
sobering to see these ruins appear out of the mists, their stone as gray
as the sky itself; more so, to stand where they stood now.
Thoradin’s Wall and the small Forsaken encampment outside it
marked the farthest point of the Horde’s reach in this land that was
the birthplace of humanity. Gilneas was not too far, wreathed in blight,
invaded by the Forsaken who had driven Genn’s people to become
refugees and had slain the king’s son.
Genn lifted a spyglass, made a soft growling sound, and handed the
instrument to Anduin. Anduin emulated him. Through the gnomish
tool, he could see armed figures patrolling the ancient wall. Just as his
people did the walls of Stromgarde Keep.
They were all Forsaken.
Tomorrow, at first light, the Desolate Council would gather at the
arch of Thoradin’s Wall. They would march out to a halfway point
marked by a fork in the simple dirt road. At the same time, the
nineteen humans selected to meet with their friends or relatives would
approach them. Calia and Faol would conduct the meetings. There
would be no other Horde or Alliance interference, though each side
had agreed to allow a group of priests to fly overhead just in case.
Anduin returned the spyglass to Genn. “I know this must be difficult
for you.”
“You know little about this,” Genn snapped.
“I understand more than you think,” Anduin continued. “I have
Turalyon and Velen to assist me.” Kindly, he added, “You didn’t need
to put yourself through this.”
“Of course I did,” Genn said. “Your father’s ghost would haunt me if
I hadn’t come.”
As Liam’s haunts you, because you did, Anduin thought sadly. “It
will all be over soon,” he said. “Thus far, Sylvanas appears to have kept
her word. Scouts report that everything seems to be in order on the
terms we discussed.”
“If she did honor a promise, it would be a first,” Genn said.
“Whatever we may think of her, we must be aware that she is a
master strategist and that she therefore believes agreeing to this will
somehow benefit her and the Horde.”
“That’s what I’m afraid of,” Genn replied.
“She’s worried about losing her grip on the Undercity because of the
Desolate Council, but she’s smart enough to know that they’re no real
threat. So she agrees to one day where members of the council only are
permitted to meet their loved ones. The council is satisfied. Plus, it’s
an honorable thing to do, and that placates any orcs, trolls, or tauren.
It’s shrewd politics.”
“She could very easily double-cross us and murder us all.”
“She could. But that would be a terrible idea. Going to war over this
right when the Horde is recovering from a brutal one? When she could
be focusing on Silithus and Azerite?” He shook his head. “A terrible
waste of resources. I don’t trust her to keep her word for honor’s sake.
I do trust her not to be stupid. Don’t you?”
Genn had no response to that.
“Your Majesties,” came Turalyon’s deep voice. “I’ve put the priests
into position. Per your agreement, twenty-five of them will mount
their gryphons tomorrow and be our eyes on the battlefield.”
“It’s not a battlefield, Turalyon,” Anduin reminded him. “This is a
peaceful gathering site. If all goes according to plan, it never will be a
battlefield.”
“My apologies. I misspoke.”
“Words have power, as I know you know. Make sure the soldiers
under you refrain from using that term.”
Turalyon nodded. “We’ve seen nothing to indicate deception on the
Horde’s part. They appear to be keeping to the proper numbers and
holding their positions.”
Anduin felt a flutter inside his chest that he quickly quelled with a
deep breath. For all his insistence that this would not provoke a war,
he shared the worries of his advisers. Sylvanas was indeed a good
strategist, and she almost certainly had plans in place that even SI:7
had been unable to ferret out.
For the moment, though, he would put aside his apprehension.
Archbishop Faol and Calia would be conducting a service shortly, and
after that he would move among those who had been brave enough—
and who loved enough—to accept the chance to be reunited with
people who would not be as they were in memory but who would be
present. Would be, as much as the Forsaken could be, alive.
There was still something left of the old sanctum of the keep. It was
more than sufficient to house the nineteen civilians who had come to
be part of the meeting, the priests, and any soldiers who wished to join
them. There were a few missing timbers in the roof, and drops of
drizzly rain fell on some of those who had assembled. No one seemed
to mind. Hope shone on their faces on a gray day, and Anduin took
heart in those expressions. This, he mused, is how you combat fear
and long-held grudges. With hope and with open hearts.
Calia and Faol waited until everyone was assembled, and then Faol
spoke.
“First, I want to reassure you that few people enjoy sitting through a
religious service for long even at the best of times. And today,” he
continued, glancing up at the gray clouds, “suffice it to say I’ll spare
you a lengthy session spent standing in a drafty old building.”
There were some chuckles and smiles. Turalyon stood next to
Anduin and said quietly, “They are still getting used to the idea of a
Forsaken priest.”
Anduin nodded. “It’s to be expected. That’s why I asked Calia to
participate, too. Seeing the two of them side by side, priests of the
Light, so obviously comfortable with each other, is a good introduction
to what they’re going to encounter shortly.”
“Has anyone recognized her yet?”
Calia had donned a nondescript, practical dress and a heavy cloak
with a hood. Most everyone had their hoods up in the light rain, so she
did not stand out. Valeera had once told him that the best disguises
were simple ones; appropriate clothes, behaving as if one belonged. No
one was looking for a queen long thought dead today.
“Not that I’ve heard. To them, she’s just a fair-haired priestess.”
Turalyon nodded but still looked concerned.
Faol continued. “Your king has already told you what we expect will
transpire, and he has advised you about what to do if a banner is
raised either at Thoradin’s Wall or here at the keep. I wish to avoid
tedious repetition, so I’ll just say be alert and move quickly.
“But I truly hope that doesn’t happen. I and my fellow priestess will
be out there with you. Others will be standing by to lend aid if needed.
You may be shopkeepers, or blacksmiths, or farmers. But today you
are my brothers and sisters. Today we are all servants of the Light. If
you’re afraid, don’t be ashamed of it. You’re doing something no one
has ever done before, and that can always hold fear. But do know that
you are doing the work of the Light. And now, accept its blessings.”
He and Calia lifted their arms, turning their faces skyward. The sun
might be hidden behind clouds, but that did not mean it wasn’t there,
sending its life-giving rays to those who dwelled on the face of this
world. It was the same with the Light, Anduin thought. It was always
present even when it seemed to be far beyond one’s reach.
A golden glow filled the area: no explosion of blinding illumination
but a gentle radiance that made Anduin’s tight chest loosen as he
inhaled deeply. He had been awake all night, both unable and
unwilling to sleep, but as he closed his eyes and opened to the healing
energy, he felt renewed, refreshed, and calm.
He stepped outside just as the clouds cleared for a moment and a
few lone, beautiful rays of sunshine fell upon the group as they made
their way out of the sanctum. This, too, was a blessing of the Light,
though simple and mundane if something as magnificent as the sun
itself could ever be called such things.
Many of those present—including Anduin himself—had never been
to this historic site. They were allowed to roam within the confines of
the fortress, though not outside it. Anduin would put no one
unnecessarily at risk by allowing them to venture too far. He believed
that Sylvanas would keep her word, but neither of them had said
anything about spies. He had SI:7 to observe and report; she had her
Deathstalkers to do the same. Their presence was yet another reason
to be concerned about Calia, and she was under strict instructions to
keep her cloak’s hood up every time she ventured outside an enclosed
space.
Most would return to the ships to sleep, though some had asked to
remain inside Stromgarde Keep. Plenty of food, clean water, tents, and
dry firewood had been provided for their comfort. Anduin watched
them as they departed the chapel, some in groups of newly found
friends, others in solitude. Some stayed behind to talk to Calia and
Faol, and that made Anduin smile. Among them he noticed the
passionate and headstrong young Philia, who seemed to almost
palpably radiate joy at Emma, an elderly woman who had lost so many
to Arthas’s war against the living—a sister and her family and, even
more tragically, Emma’s own three sons. “Ol’ Emma,” as Anduin had
learned some called her, was not the hardiest of women, and her mind
had a tendency to wander. But she seemed alert and her color was
good as she spoke first to Calia and then, cautiously, to Faol.
“I have, in some ways, learned more lessons in the past several
months than in a thousand years,” Turalyon said, following Anduin’s
gaze. “There’s much I have been wrong about.”
“Genn still thinks this is a bad idea.”
“He’s right to worry. Sylvanas is…slippery. But no one can truly
know another’s heart. You have to make the best call with the
information you have—and your own instincts. Genn is fueled by
anger and hatred—not all the time, but often. You and I are fueled by
other things.”
“The Light,” Anduin said quietly.
“The Light, yes,” Turalyon agreed. “But we should let it guide us, not
command us. We also have our own minds and hearts. We should
make use of those as well.”
Anduin said nothing. He had heard of the battles that Turalyon and
Alleria had been fighting for a millennium. He knew they had been
devotees of a naaru called Xe’ra, who, they thought, had epitomized
what they loved best about the Light. Instead, Xe’ra had revealed
herself to be stern and implacable—dangerously so.
“One day soon,” Anduin said at last, “I would talk to you about your
experiences with the Light. But for now, I understand your words and
agree with them.”
Turalyon nodded. “I will share what I can in the hope that it will
help you be the ruler your grandfather and father were. And I will ask
my son, Arator, to come to Stormwind soon. You two are very similar.”
“From what I hear, he’s the better swordsman.” Anduin grinned.
“Nearly every swordsman I know says the same thing, so you’re in
good company.” Turalyon looked up at the sky. “Still late afternoon.
What are your plans?”
“I’ll walk with Genn. Have him tell me what he remembers of this
place. It will help distract us both. Then…” He shrugged. “I don’t think
I’ll be getting much sleep tonight.”
“Nor I. I seldom sleep before battle.”
“This isn’t a battle,” Anduin said, not for the first time. Turalyon
regarded him kindly with warm brown eyes, a hint of a smile on his
scarred visage.
“Tomorrow, you, the forty-one people on the field, and everyone
watching will be engaging in a battle not for property or riches but for
the hearts and minds of the future,” Turalyon said. “I would call that a
battle, Your Majesty, and one well worth fighting.”
—
That night, torches were lit along the ramparts of the old fortress,
something the walls had not seen in many years. The warm, dancing
light chased away darkness but coexisted with the flickering shadows
of its own creation. The night was oddly clear, and the moonlight was
kind to the area.
Anduin had wrapped himself in a cape and now stood looking out
over the rolling landscape. Thoradin’s Wall was only a slight smudge
of pale stone in the distance. Anduin saw nothing moving there or in
the field that stretched between the two outposts.
He closed his eyes for a moment, breathing the cool, moist air.
Light, you’ve guided and shaped me for most of my life. And since my
father died, I’ve woken up every morning with the fate of tens of
thousands of people resting on my shoulders. You have helped me
bear this burden, and I have been blessed to have many wise people
to rely upon. But this one’s on me. It feels like the right thing to do.
The bones that were shattered by the bell are easy tonight. My heart
is clear, but my mind…
He shook his head and said aloud, “Father, you always seemed so
certain. And you acted so swiftly. I wonder if you ever doubted as I
do.”
“No one save a madman or a child is completely free from doubt.”
Anduin turned, laughing a little in embarrassment. “My apologies,”
he said to Calia. “You stumbled upon my ramblings.”
“I apologize for intruding,” she said. “I thought you might want
company.”
He considered declining her offer, then said, “Stay if you like. I
might not be the best companion, though.”
“Nor I,” she admitted. “We’ll be awkward together, then.”
Anduin chuckled. He was growing fond of Calia. At nearly forty, she
was much older than he was, but she felt less like a parent figure, as
Jaina had been, and more like a big sister. Was it the Light in her that
made him feel so easy in her presence? Or was it simply who she was?
She had been a big sister once.
“Would it pain you to talk of Arthas?” he asked. “Before things…
before.”
“No. I loved my little brother, but few people seem to grasp that. He
was not always a monster. And that little boy is how I’ll always
remember him.”
A sudden smile crossed her features. “Did you know,” she said, “he
was once terrible at swordplay?”
E
lsie hoped that the Alliance participants in the Gathering had had
a pleasant journey. It was a much longer trip for them than it was
for the Forsaken. The Arathi Highlands were comparatively close, only
a short flight via bat.
Of course, a short flight via bat was still exciting, as she so seldom
traveled anywhere other than Brill to visit some friends. She could
hardly believe that the day had finally come, that this meeting was
actually happening, as her bat landed and she slipped off onto the soft
grass at a site named Galen’s Fall.
It was an apt name, as the human prince Galen Trollbane, onetime
heir to the once-great kingdom of Stromgarde, had been slain on this
spot years earlier by the Forsaken. Lady Sylvanas’s apothecaries had
raised him from death’s grasp, and for a time he had served her. Then
he rebelled, taking his men and declaring that he owed no allegiance to
anyone other than himself and that he would restore Stromgarde to its
former glory.
Stromgarde Keep lay to the south; one could see it from here. It was
still in ruins, and Galen had fallen twice—once as a human, once as a
Forsaken. Such, mused Elsie, is the fate of those who would defy the
Banshee Queen.
A Forsaken handler took the reins and fed the bat a large dead
insect, which it chomped happily as it was led away.
Parqual was waiting for her, his gray-green lips turned up in a smile.
In his arms he held a ratty old teddy bear. “I’m glad you came,” he
said, “even though you don’t have anyone waiting for you.”
“Of course I had to come,” she said. “I had to see you reunite with
that daughter you keep going on and on about.” She nodded at the toy.
“You must remember, Philia is going to be a big girl now. She might be
a little old for a teddy bear. Quite a few years have passed.”
He chuckled. “I know, I know. I’m just so pleased she wanted to see
me.” He indicated the stuffed animal. “Brownie Bear here was the first
toy I gave her when she was born. She was afraid she’d forget it on her
trip to Stormwind, so she left it behind. It’s…one of the few things of
my old life that I have. And I wanted to share that with her.”
Elsie beamed at her friend, letting his pleasure and anticipation be
hers just a little bit. She looked around contentedly. Although many on
the council had met with rejection on their first—or sometimes second
or third—attempts to contact the living, every member finally did find
someone who would agree to come. It was going to be a memorable
day.
“She’s not here yet,” Parqual continued. “I wonder if she had second
thoughts about coming.”
“I don’t see why she would tell us she would come and then not,”
Elsie said. As she looked around, she noticed that Annie Lansing had a
basket of sachets, flowers in full bloom, and scarves and she was
allowing council members to make a selection. Annie had no jawbone,
and she currently had a pretty green scarf wrapped around the lower
part of her face.
“Oh, that’s such a nice thing Annie is doing,” Elsie exclaimed. “It’s
going to be difficult for our loved ones to see what’s happened to us. A
scarf or a sachet will help.” Some Forsaken had survived their time
with death better than others; a gentling of their decomposition would
assist the Alliance members in seeing past the body, which had
endured so much, so they could focus instead on the person.
“That’s a fine idea!” Parqual’s face was not too disfigured, and
carefully chosen trousers and a jacket covered his exposed bones. But
he was aware that to the living, he might not smell particularly
pleasant. “I think I’ll get myself a sachet.”
“You’d better hurry; they look very popular!” Elsie smiled as
Parqual, clutching Brownie Bear, shuffled off quickly toward the
thronged Annie.
Elsie turned her attention to the ramparts of the great wall and the
line of archers atop them. When one of them turned around, Elsie
started as she realized that these women, strong and lithe and still
beautiful even in their undeath, could only be Sylvanas’s elite dark
rangers. They stood as still as if carved from stone, their quivers full of
arrows, their bows held in one hand. Only their cloaks and their long
hair moved in the breeze.
Nathanos Blightcaller was atop the wall as well, talking quietly to
them. He met Elsie’s gaze and nodded to her. She nodded back.
“There she is!” someone called, and Elsie turned.
The Dark Lady was coming.
Sylvanas rode atop one of the bats, her white-gold hair and glowing
red eyes marking her as unmistakably as her bearing. The bat came in
for a landing, and Sylvanas leaped gracefully from its back. No stiff
movement of bone or sloughing skin for her. Her face was smooth,
with high cheekbones, and her movements were as lithe as they had
been when she yet breathed. Elsie felt an overwhelming sense of
gratitude that her leader was here to support them even though
Sylvanas had concerns.
The fire-red gaze swept the small crowd and alighted on Elsie.
“Ah, Prime Governor,” Sylvanas said. “It is good to see you again. I
trust that no one has forgotten the procedure I outlined for what is to
come.”
Forgotten? Elsie had it emblazoned on her mind, and she was
certain everyone else did, too. No one wanted to jeopardize future
meetings by causing anything to go wrong at today’s.
Sylvanas turned and pointed at the figures on the wall. “A few
reminders, just in case. These archers are here for your protection.
Anduin has the same number along the ramparts of Stromgarde Keep.
You already know Archbishop Alonsus Faol. He and another priest will
be accompanying the Alliance humans as they head toward the
meeting site, which will be halfway between the fortresses. They will
be moving about with you to facilitate conversations—and to monitor
them.”
Her gaze roamed over the assembled council members. “When you
engage with your Alliance counterparts, you will speak of nothing
other than your past history with them. You will not discuss your
existence with me in the Undercity. They will not discuss their current
lives, either. Faol and the other priest have agreed that if they happen
upon anyone, Forsaken or human, indulging in such conversations—or
indeed anything that could smack of treason or disrespect to the other
side—those parties will receive a reminder. A second time, and they
will be escorted off the field. Treat the archbishop and the priest with
appropriate courtesy and obey them. Dawn is almost here. Once day
breaks, if we are prepared, I will sound the horn once, and you may
take the field. You will have until dusk. If for any reason I deem it
necessary to call a halt to the meeting, I will sound the horn again
three times and erect the Forsaken banner. Should this happen, return
immediately.”
Elsie wanted to know how immediate “immediately” was. Surely, if
one wanted to express a final word of caring, or perhaps even an
embrace if the Alliance member was brave enough, that was not a
treasonous action. But one did not question the Dark Lady.
“When the meeting has concluded, the horn will alert you that it is
time to come home,” Sylvanas finished. “Is that understood?”
One obeyed, especially in this situation, in which misconduct or
even a simple misunderstanding on either side could mean a fresh
outbreak of a war that—well, no one needed that right now, certainly.
So Elsie stayed silent. When the horn blew, her people would say
farewell and return right away. It was clear-cut and brooked no
disagreement.
There was the soft thudding of hooves on grass as one of Sylvanas’s
dark rangers led a bony horse to the Dark Lady. She nodded and took
the reins, then returned her glowing gaze to her subjects.
“I ride now to meet with the young human king. I do this for you.
Because you are Forsaken. I will not be long. And then you may go
forth and meet the humans who had once been part of your former
life. You will see if they still have a place in your current existence.”
She paused, and when she spoke again, Elsie thought she heard
threads of regret lacing the words.
“You should prepare for great disappointment. Though they may
try, the living cannot truly understand us. Only we can. Only we know.
But you have asked this of me, and so I give it to you. I will return
shortly.”
Without another word, she swung herself into the saddle and turned
the skeletal horse’s head.
Alone, weaponless, Sylvanas Windrunner, the Dark Lady of the
Forsaken, the Banshee Queen, rode to meet the king of Stormwind.
Elsie had never felt prouder to be a Forsaken.
A
nduin had seen Lady Sylvanas Windrunner before, of course. All
the major political figures in Azeroth had assembled in the
Temple of the White Tiger to witness judgment passed on Garrosh
Hellscream. He suspected but did not know for certain that she had
been involved with the plot against Hellscream’s life. Certainly he
wouldn’t put it past her. Sylvanas, she who was dead and yet “lived,”
had no compunctions about ending the lives of others.
There was no question in Anduin’s mind that forbidding Genn to
accompany him to this meeting had been the right thing. Greymane
had proved a worthy and valuable ally, and he had been open about his
affection toward Anduin. But there were some positions you just didn’t
put someone in. So close to the person Genn hated more than anyone
in the world was one such. Anduin trusted Genn and was fond of him,
but he knew that here, but a few paces away from his enemy, Genn
probably would have attacked. And whether Genn died or Sylvanas
did, war would have broken out at the worst possible time.
Anduin did not need Shalamayne or even the more familiar mace,
Fearbreaker. His weapon was the Light. And of course, Sylvanas was
deadly enough without a bow. All she needed to do was open her
mouth and utter a wail, and he would perish.
As he rode the white-coated Reverence along the soft earthen road
toward the meeting site, a small hill midway between their respective
fortresses, he saw a still-tiny shape approaching.
Sylvanas was mounted on one of her unnerving skeletal steeds.
Reverence’s nostrils flared as he caught the scent of death and decay,
but true to his name, the horse didn’t falter. He was a trained war
mount. Ordinary horses would be unsettled by the scent of blood or
bodies. They would avoid stepping on other creatures if possible. Not
warhorses. In battle, Reverence would be an extension of Anduin and
an additional weapon, running down enemies and trampling them
underfoot. The horse was trained to act counter to his instincts.
As I have been, Anduin thought. We are both prepared to go
against our natures if we must.
He continued to draw closer to the Banshee Queen. He could see her
more clearly now. Sylvanas had come unarmed, as he had demanded
they both be. He could see her red eyes glowing beneath the hood she
wore, her skin a muted blue-green not at all out of place in the somber,
drizzly land, the marks under her eyes looking oddly like tear stains.
She was beautiful and deadly, as beautiful and deadly as the flowers of
the toxic herb Maiden’s Anguish.
Emotions tumbled within him at the sight: Apprehension. Hope.
And at the foremost, anger. Baine had told him that Vol’jin had
ordered the retreat; Sylvanas had carried it out. But had Vol’jin done
so, really? Had there truly been no alternative? Had Sylvanas betrayed
his father and left him and everyone on that airship to die? And if she
had…should Anduin even be talking peace with her now?
The words he had said so recently about Varian Wrynn, to the
gathered crowd at Lion’s Rest, came back to him. He knew that no one
—not even a king—is more important than the Alliance. Anduin did,
too. If all went well today, the Alliance could soon be safer than it ever
had been. Whatever Sylvanas had or had not done, Anduin was certain
that this was the right path. And sometimes the right path was a
painful and dangerous one.
They came within ten feet of each other and brought their mounts to
a halt. For a long moment, they simply took each other’s measure. The
only sounds were the soft sigh of the wind that stirred both gold and
silvery hair, the stamp of Reverence’s hooves, and the creak of the
saddle as the great horse shifted. Sylvanas and her undead mount
stayed perfectly, unnaturally still.
Then, impulsively, Anduin swung himself down and took a few steps
toward Sylvanas. She raised a brow. After a pause, she emulated him,
walking almost languidly until they were less than a yard apart.
Anduin broke the silence. “Warchief,” he said, and nodded
acknowledgment. “Thank you for honoring my request.”
“Little Lion,” she said in that throaty, strangely echoing tone that
the Forsaken had.
The term stung more than it ought to. Aerin, the brave dwarf who
had died trying to save lives, had called him that with warmth. He did
not like Sylvanas twisting that memory to an insult.
“King Anduin Wrynn,” he said, “and not so little anymore. You
would do well not to underestimate me.”
She smirked slightly. “You are still small enough.”
“I’m sure we have better use of our time than to stand here flinging
insults.”
“I do not.” She was enjoying this. He imagined that to her, he did
appear small. After all, by her actions at the Broken Shore, ordered or
not, she had sealed Varian’s death. What was the son to her but a
speck, a flea, a minor inconvenience?
“Yes, you do,” he said, not allowing himself to be baited. “You are
the warchief of the Horde. Its members fought bravely against the
Legion. And the people closest to you—the Forsaken—have asked
something of you that means much to them, and you have listened.”
She met his gaze implacably. He had no idea if he was getting
through to her. Most likely not, he thought ruefully. But that was not
why he had come here today.
“This is not an offer of peace,” he continued. “Merely a cease-fire for
a twelve-hour period.”
“So you said in your letter. And I responded that I agreed to your
terms. Why are we having this conversation?”
“Because I wanted to see you in person,” the king replied. “I want to
hear from your own lips that no member of the Alliance will be
harmed.”
She rolled her eyes. “Does your precious Light tell you if someone is
lying?”
“I’ll know,” he said simply. That wasn’t exactly true. He thought he
would know. He believed he would know. But he wasn’t certain. The
Light was not a sword. A sharp blade could always be relied on to cut
flesh if the blow was struck a certain way. The Light was more
nebulous. It responded to faith, not just skill. And oddly, it was
because of that that he trusted it even more than Shalamayne.
Something flickered on her face and then was gone. She lifted her
chin slightly as she replied, “Do you not trust me to keep my word,
then?”
He shrugged. “You’ve gone back on it before.”
There it was. Varian’s death. Sylvanas didn’t reply at once. Then,
almost courteously, she said, “I give you my word. As the Dark Lady of
the Forsaken and as warchief of the Horde. No member of the Alliance
will come to harm by any member of the Horde today. Including me.
Does that satisfy you, Your Majesty?”
There was an extra emphasis on the last two words. She was not
showing respect by using them. She was using his new position as a
not-so-subtle knife between the ribs. Because they both knew that in a
better world it would have been Varian Wrynn speaking with her. And
this meeting would have been less fraught with tension, resentment,
and mistrust.
Anduin spoke before he could stop himself.
“Did you betray my father?”
Sylvanas stiffened.
Anduin’s heart sped up, slamming against his chest. It was not a
question he had intended to ask. But it was the one he needed to. He
had to know. Had to know if Genn Greymane was right—if Sylvanas
had set up his father and the Alliance army to die.
—
The words were out there.
Sylvanas stood motionless as a stone, her face expressionless. Her
chest did not rise and fall with breath. Her heart did not pump blood.
But even so, she was shocked that the boy had the courage to confront
her so bluntly—and so quickly.
She had not given much thought to the events of the Broken Shore.
There had been so much else to seize her attention, and she was not
one for rumination. But now her thoughts flew back to that bloody,
chaotic moment as if she again stood on that rise, with the Alliance
army below her, fighting fiercely, while the Horde gave all its mighty
heart to the attack.
We make our stand here, she had told the archers. And so they had,
firing arrow after arrow, like a deadly rain, a storm, upon the loathed,
fel-fueled enemy. And it was working. The Legion came, wave after
wave of demonic monstrosities, each more horrible and horrifying
than the last. But Varian’s people were good. As were her own.
The bellow of surprise and warning had caused her to whirl.
Sylvanas had watched, stunned, as a flood of demons poured through
the gap behind her. She beheld Thrall, mighty warrior and shaman,
the founder of the current Horde—on his knees, his green body
trembling with the simple effort of trying to get on his feet. Baine
stood over him, savagely defending his friend. Shock paralyzed her for
a moment.
And then her warchief’s words: Dey’re comin’ from behind! Cover
da flank!
The spear. That awful spear, piercing Vol’jin’s torso as he shouted
out his order. It should have killed him immediately, but Vol’jin was
not ready to die. Not yet. Purpose fueled him. He slew his killer and
continued to fight, growing weaker before her eyes. Before Sylvanas
knew it, she was on her horse, riding toward her leader, scooping him
up to get him off the battlefield to safety.
In what must have been an agonizing effort, the troll turned and
looked up at her. He whispered the order to her, his voice too weak for
others to hear over the din of furious battle.
Do not let da Horde die dis day.
It was a direct command from her warchief. And it was the right
one. The Alliance effort below, valiant as it was, was dependent on
Horde assistance. If the Horde retreated now, Varian’s army would
fall.
But if the Horde stayed and fought, then both armies would fall.
Sylvanas had closed her eyes, each option unacceptable to her, but
she made the only choice she could: obeying the will of the warchief,
who later would die from the poisoned spear and, to everyone’s
astonishment, appoint Sylvanas Windrunner as leader of the Horde.
She lifted the horn to her lips and sounded the retreat. She had told
no one of the regret she had felt when, standing on the stern of her
ship, she beheld the green smoke of the explosion below, where Varian
had fallen, and wondered if she was watching the final, excruciating
moments of a mighty warrior.
Sylvanas would tell no one of that now, either. But as she stood
before the young king, she could see traces of his father in him that
had come with the last few years. Not just physically, in Anduin’s
increased height and more muscled physique, or even in the strong
line of a determined jaw. She saw Varian in his bearing.
Did you betray my father?
Later, she would question her choice in responding. But in this
moment she had no desire to offer falsehood.
“Varian Wrynn’s destiny was set in stone, Little Lion. The Legion’s
numbers would have seen to that whatever choice I made that day.”
His blue eyes searched hers for the lie. He found none. Something
about him relaxed ever so slightly. He nodded.
“What happens here today benefits both the Horde and the Alliance.
I am glad you have agreed to honor this cease-fire. I hereby swear to
you that I, too, will abide by it, and no member of the Horde will come
to harm by any Alliance hand this day.” He inclined his head in
acknowledgment as he mirrored her words, adding, “Including mine.”
“Then we have nothing more to say.”
He shook his golden head. “No, we don’t. And I regret that. Perhaps
another day we will meet again and speak of other things that could
help both our peoples.”
Sylvanas allowed herself a small smile. “I doubt that very much.”
Without another word, Sylvanas turned, offering him a clear shot at
her back, leaped into the saddle of her undead steed, and galloped
down the path the way she had come.
D
espite the harsh words from the Horde leader as she left, Anduin
felt hopeful. He believed her…Legion forces had been appearing
everywhere, Genn had told him. If Horde soldiers had been surprised
on that ridge, and Anduin believed Baine’s report that they had, it was
not unreasonable to suppose that remaining there would have doomed
them—and the Alliance.
He had thought he would never know the real, full story. But if
things went well today and in future such encounters, then perhaps
many questions could be answered—and not just his.
A squire stepped forward and took Reverence’s reins as the king
slipped from the horse’s back. “You’re back in one piece,” Genn
observed.
“Don’t sound so disappointed,” Anduin joked.
“It went well, then,” Turalyon said.
Anduin sobered as he regarded the paladin. He was as much a
personal hero to the young king as Faol was. Turalyon loved a woman
who skirted the line between the Void and the Light, whose sister was
the one with whom he had just met.
“Yes,” he said. “It did.” He made a decision on the spot. “I asked her
about Father,” he told Genn. “She said there was nothing she could
have done to save him. And I believe her.”
“Of course she would say that,” Genn scoffed. “Anduin…” He shook
his head. “Sometimes you are simply too naive. I fear that something is
going to come along and beat that out of you one of these days.”
“I’m not naive. This…felt true.”
Genn continued to scowl, but Turalyon nodded. “I understand.”
Anduin stepped between them, clapping each of them on a shoulder.
“Let’s begin. There are people anxious to be with their families.”
“I’ll tell the priests to stand ready by the gryphons,” Turalyon said.
May they be needed only for blessings, Anduin thought but did not
say. Aloud, he said only, “Thank you, Turalyon.”
He moved forward, looking at the nineteen people who stood
waiting. On their faces were expressions of apprehension and
excitement. Their king understood both emotions completely.
“It is time,” he said. “May today be a day of change. Of connection.
Of hope and looking forward to a day where reuniting with loved ones
becomes a commonplace occurrence rather than a historic one. You’ll
be watched and will be protected.”
They had been blessed by two priests already, but this benediction
would be from their king. He lifted his hands and called down the
Light upon those gathered. Eyes closed. Lips turned up in soft smiles,
and he could feel calmness settle on those present. Including himself.
“Light be with you,” Anduin said. He looked first at Archbishop
Faol, who put a hand on his unbeating heart and bowed, and then at
Calia, who had stayed up with him all night distracting him with
stories. She smiled, her eyes shining. This moment was as much for
them as it was for the active participants.
He nodded to Turalyon, who bowed his head, and waved to Genn
Greymane. Anduin’s chief adviser’s glower had not lifted since their
arrival, but he nodded now and shouted orders.
What remained of the enormous wooden doors creaked and
shuddered open. Anduin recalled his conversation with Turalyon. The
paladin had said that they would all be battling “not for property or
riches but for the hearts and minds of the future.”
For a moment, the group simply stood. Then one of them—Philia—
shouldered her way through the crowd and began striding forward
boldly, her body straight, her jaw set, her booted feet traveling swiftly
over the green sward.
As if it was a signal the others had been awaiting, they started
moving, too, some with quicker paces than others. No one was allowed
to break into a run lest someone mistake haste for danger. But they
flowed out of the gate and toward the cluster of shapes that were now
coming out of Thoradin’s Wall.
Over the sounds of conversation, a happy laugh rang out, sounding
kind and strangely hollow. It was Archbishop Faol. And suddenly
Anduin found joyful tears stinging his eyes.
You led the Army of the Light, Turalyon, Anduin thought, and his
heart lifted. But this is the army of hope.
—
Ol’ Emma kept wondering if this was truly happening or if it was just
one of her daydreams. She decided that the pain in her joints as she
walked across the soft grass, at a much more rapid pace than usual,
proved that it was indeed a reality. Emma walked a great deal on a
daily basis, carrying water back from the well to her small, tidy home,
so endurance was not the problem. Speed was. She wanted so badly to
be like Philia and all but run toward the center of the field, but her age
would not permit her. She told herself that Jem, Jack, and Jake
doubtless had learned patience in their time as undead. They could
wait a few more moments to see her.
She was the one who didn’t want to wait.
Someone fell in step beside her. He carried a beautifully crafted
helm and introduced himself as Osric Strang.
“I’m Emma Felstone,” Emma said. “That looks mighty heavy.”
Osric, a powerfully muscled man with red hair and a beard, laughed.
“Heavy enough to do its job. I made this for the—the person I’m going
to see today. Tomas was like a brother to me. We used to argue over
who made the best armor, when we served as guards—him in
Lordaeron, me in Stormwind. I thought him lost forever that horrible
day.”
Osric gestured to the helm. “I thought if he’d survived being turned
into a Forsaken with his brain intact, I’d better do what I could to keep
it that way.” He smiled down at her. “Who are you going to see?”
“My boys,” Emma replied. She could hear the smile in her voice. “All
three of them. They were in Lordaeron when…” She couldn’t finish.
Osric regarded her with deep sympathy. “I’m…I’m so sorry you lost
them. But I’m very glad they joined the council so you can see them
again.”
“Oh, I am, too,” Emma said. “You have to focus on what you have,
don’t you?”
“That you do.” The armorer shifted the helm to the crook of one arm
and extended the other to Emma. “It can be a bit tricky walking over
this terrain. Hang on to me.”
Such a good boy, she thought as she gratefully did so. Just like
mine.
The meeting site—exactly midway between Stromgarde Keep and
Thoradin’s Wall—had been prepared for the event. There were two
tables, one on each side. One was where the Horde could put gifts for
the Alliance, and the other was where the Alliance could place their
own gifts. Osric walked up to the Alliance table and set down the helm,
then rejoined Emma. The priestess who had interviewed them smiled
winningly beneath her hood at the assembled participants, then asked
them to form a long line facing their Horde counterparts.
Earlier, the weather had been damp and cold, the sky overcast. Now,
though, the clouds were disappearing and sunlight peeked out. As
everyone moved into position, Emma looked about anxiously for her
sons. With a pang of worry, she wondered if she would even be able to
recognize them. Although she had met Archbishop Faol, Emma wasn’t
fully prepared for how bad some of the Forsaken looked.
No one would mistake them for living beings, and the sunlight was
not kind to them. Bones jutted through gray-green skin. Their eyes
glowed eerily, and they hunched and shuffled as they walked.
Well, she told herself. My skin is all wrinkled, and I sometimes
hunch and shuf le, too.
There was a long silence. Archbishop Faol moved forward. “If you
wish to leave now, you may do so,” he said in that strange but pleasant
voice. At first no one moved, but then Emma saw about four or five
humans, their faces shocked and almost as gray as those of the
Forsaken, turn and hasten back toward the keep. One of those who
had been rebuffed cried out after a departing figure in a hollow voice
that held a world of sorrow. The others stood for a moment, then
turned and began the long walk the way they had come, their heads
bowed. Oh, those poor things, Emma thought.
“Anyone else?” Faol inquired. There were none. “Excellent. When I
call your name, please step forward to me. You’ll be joined by your
loved one, and you may then roam the field together freely.”
He unrolled a parchment and read.
“Emma Felstone!”
Emma’s heart surged. To Osric, she queried in a shaking voice, “Is it
time for me to see them now? After so long?”
“If you like,” said the priestess. “If you don’t, you can return to the
keep.”
Emma shook her head. “Oh, no. No, no. I won’t disappoint them like
those other folks.” Osric patted her hand reassuringly; and Emma
pulled away, straightened, and made her way unaided to where Faol
stood.
“Jem, Jack, and Jake Felstone,” the archbishop called.
Three tall Forsaken stepped forward from their own line, advancing
hesitantly. Emma stared at them as they approached. They had all
been so large and fit in life. Such strong young men. How confident
they had been, how proud to serve Lordaeron. Now they were but skin
and bones and limp clotted hair. It took her a moment to read their
expressions.
Her sons, once laughing and confident, looked…frightened.
They are more afraid here, in front of me, than on a battlefield,
Emma realized. And then all the differences between her and them
suddenly didn’t matter.
She started to weep even though she felt her mouth curve in an
enormous smile.
“My boys,” she said. “Oh, my boys!”
“Mama!” Jack said, lurching toward her.
“We’ve missed you so much!” Jem said. And Jake simply bowed his
head, overcome with the moment. Then, all three of the Forsaken bent
to embrace their mother.
—
Thank you, Calia said to the Light as she watched the matriarch of the
reunited family shed tears of joy. Thank you for this.
She listened, smiling, as other names were called. They stepped
forward, hesitant or joyful. Some simply shook their heads and, unable
to take the final steps now that the moment had come, returned in
silence, leaving their Forsaken loved ones standing alone until they,
too, turned away and went back to the wall. Calia prayed for them: the
ones who had refused and the ones who had been rebuffed. All were
hurting. All needed the Light’s blessing.
But there were surprisingly few of them. Most of the reunions were
cautious at first: stilted, awkward. But that was all right, too.
“Philia Fintallas,” read the archbishop. Philia was in the very
forefront, and she had spotted her father, Parqual, already. At the
sound of her name, she ran right up to him, shouting, “Papa!”
These two needed no urging or mediating. They hastened to each
other, stopping just short of touching, and both wore smiles as large as
Calia’s heart felt. “It’s really you,” Philia said, putting so much into the
single word.
After the first few reintroductions, things flowed much more
smoothly and swiftly. Not all the reunions were as joyful and easy as
others, but they were talking. Forsaken and human were talking. Who
could ever have believed this moment would happen? One man—one
king—had.
And if this could happen, perhaps more could, too. More events that
should have happened but that Arthas had so tragically destroyed.
There is such a thing as a new beginning, she thought. For all of us.
Faol stepped beside her. “These eyes have seen so much pain. How
delightful, after everything that has happened, that they can still
behold this.”
“Do you think there will be another gathering?” Calia asked.
“I hope so, but that rests entirely with Sylvanas. Perhaps even she
will find she still has a heart, just as these people have.”
“We can hope,” Calia said.
“Yes, indeed,” Faol replied. “We can always hope.”
S
ylvanas Windrunner stood on the top of the ancient wall.
Nathanos, as always, was beside her. Her gaze was fixed on the
scene unfolding in the distance.
“It seems to be going without incident,” Sylvanas said. “Any reason
to believe it is not?”
“None that I have learned, my queen,” Nathanos said.
“Although I see that some of the humans have scorned interaction
with those whose hopes they had raised,” she said. “That was cruel of
them.”
“It was,” Nathanos agreed. He offered nothing more.
“I was reluctant to agree to this gathering, but perhaps this is a good
thing. Now my Forsaken begin to understand how they are perceived
even by those who once claimed to love them.”
“You were wise to have permitted it, my queen. Let them see for
themselves what the situation is. If it is painful to them, they will not
wish to repeat the experience. If it is joyful to them, you have
something to hold over them to keep them obedient. Not,” he added,
“that there was ever much to fear from this group.”
“It was good for me to witness this. I have learned much from it.”
“Will you repeat it?”
Sylvanas squinted up at the sun. “The day is young yet. I am not
done observing. Nor will I relax my vigilance. Varian’s whelp likes to
appear as though he is utterly without guile, but he may be shrewder
than we give him credit for. He could have planned an attack on his
own people with an eye to blaming us for it. Then he would be seen as
a strong leader to declare war on us. The ultimate protector of the
helpless.”
“It is possible, my queen.”
She gave him one of her rare, wry smiles. “But you think otherwise.”
“With respect, such a thing sounds more like a strategy you would
employ,” he said.
“It does,” she said. “But not today. We are not prepared for a war.”
She glanced at the rangers she had positioned atop the wall. Their
quivers were full, their bows strapped to their backs within easy reach.
They would attack the instant she told them to.
Sylvanas smiled.
ARATHI HIGHLANDS FIELD
Parqual and Philia had wandered over to the Forsaken exchange table.
Elsie watched them happily as Parqual pointed at an old, tattered
teddy bear, and tears streamed down the girl’s face.
“I want to hold Brownie,” Elsie heard her say. “I want to hold you,
Papa.”
“Oh, my little one, or not so little one,” he chuckled, “Brownie is off
limits till your king says it’s safe. And as for me, my skin can’t handle
those bear hugs I remember.”
Philia wiped her face. “Can I hold your hand if I do it gently?”
People thought that because Forsaken flesh was dead, it was limited
in what it could communicate. Nothing could be further from the
truth. A myriad of expressions crossed Parqual’s face: joy, love, fear,
hope.
“If you like, child,” he said.
Forsaken came in all stages of death: freshly slain, partially rotting,
almost mummified. Parqual was the last of these even though he’d
been so determined to have a sachet tucked in his pocket, and Elsie
wanted to hug them both as he extended his withered, parchmentfragile hand and placed it in his daughter’s smooth, living one.
Elsie wanted to linger with Parqual and Philia to savor the reunion
of parent and child. But there were others, who found themselves at a
loss for words or didn’t know how to react and might appreciate
someone to help. These two would be all right. They had come with
love and trepidation in their hearts. But they also had come with
something else: hope.
“Mother?” The voice belonged to Jem, the oldest of the Felstone
boys. He sounded upset. Elsie looked around for him. She found him
with Jack and Jake, forming a ring around their tiny mother; then one
of them stepped aside, looking around for aid.
Elsie saw that their mother, Emma, was ashen and seemed to be
having difficulty breathing. “Priestess!” one of them cried, his
sepulchral voice tinged with fear. “Please, help her!”
The cloaked woman hastened over and lifted a hand. The Light
came to her, called down as if from the sun itself, and she sent it
toward the mother. The older woman gasped softly. Her pale face
warmed to a humanly healthy pink hue, and she blinked, looking
around for the woman who had healed her. Their eyes met, and the
priestess smiled.
“Thank you so much,” Elsie said.
“It’s an honor to be here,” the priestess replied. “Pardon me, I
couldn’t help but notice that you’re standing alone. Did your meeting
not go well?” Her face was largely in shadow, but Elsie saw that her
smile was kind.
“Oh, my dear, you’re so sweet,” Elsie said. “I’m fine. I’m just here to
share my council’s joy.”
The priestess gasped softly, and she moved toward Elsie. “You must
be Prime Governor Benton,” she said. She reached for the Forsaken
woman’s hands. “I heard about Wyll. I’m so sorry.”
Elsie started to draw back, then paused. Surely someone Faol
trusted to assist him would not find Elsie’s leathery, cold appendages
horrifying. The priestess took them in hers very carefully, already
aware, as brave young Philia was just discovering, that one had to be
gentle with the Forsaken. Their flesh was so very fragile. And yet, as
Elsie had observed, most of them seemed starved for physical contact.
The priestess’s hands were soft and warm. The touch felt so
pleasant. Then she released Elsie’s hands but stayed near.
“Thank you,” Elsie said. “The archbishop has been so kind to us.
We’re grateful that you and he are here with all of us today.”
“I am happier to be here than you know,” the human woman
assured her. “I wanted to make sure I found you to thank you for being
so willing to work with us. Know that King Anduin deeply regrets that
he can’t thank you in person.”
Elsie waved a dismissive hand. “This isn’t a safe place for a human
king to be. He’s got to think about his people. I owe him a debt I can
never repay. He was with my Wyll as he passed, when I couldn’t be.
And I will tell you, Wyll loved those Wrynn boys like they were his
own.”
The two women stood together, watching the event continue to
unfold. Here and there they heard the sound of laughter. They smiled
at each other.
“This is a good thing,” Elsie said. “A very good thing.”
“His Majesty hopes that if all goes well today, your warchief might
be agreeable to another such meeting at a later time.”
Elsie’s smile faded slightly. “I do not believe that will happen,” the
Prime Governor said. “But then again, I never believed it would
happen at all. So it shows you what I know, I suppose.” She chuckled.
“If there is a second Gathering,” the priestess continued, “King
Anduin wants to meet you.”
“Oh, my, wouldn’t that be lovely!” Elsie glanced back toward the
keep. It was far enough away that she couldn’t distinguish faces, but it
would appear that the young king was not shy about letting himself be
seen. He stood wearing his distinctive armor draped with a blue tabard
bearing the golden lion of Stormwind. The bright shafts of sunlight
seemed to seek him out, to catch the gleam of his armor and his golden
hair.
“Queen Tiffin was such a beauty. And so kind,” Elsie mused.
“Anduin has her hair. ‘A boy of sunshine,’ Wyll called him. No one
knew then, back when I still breathed, that the boy of sunshine would
one day be a king of the Light!”
As they watched, another stepped up beside the king of Stormwind:
tall, powerfully built, with white hair. “Who’s that gentleman?” Elsie
asked.
For a moment, a deeper shadow passed over the priestess’s face.
“That’s King Genn Greymane of Gilneas,” she said.
“Oh, dear,” Elsie said. “I imagine he’s not too happy about all this.”
“He may not be,” the priestess replied. “But he’s standing beside his
king, and he’s watching us.”
She lifted her arm. “You might not be able to meet King Anduin, but
you can wave to him,” she told Elsie.
Hesitantly, Elsie imitated her. At first, her movements were small
and shy, but when Anduin saw them and returned the gesture,
pleasure rushed through her and she waved more vigorously.
Unsurprisingly, Greymane did not join in. But that was all right. He
was there. Perhaps he would see something today that would move
him.
“Imagine me, Elsie Benton, waving hello to a king!” she murmured.
And when Anduin bowed to her, the Prime Governor of the Desolate
Council laughed brightly in surprise.
ARATHI HIGHLANDS, THORADIN’S WALL
Sylvanas made a point of speaking with each of the council members
who had returned, angry and disillusioned, to the wall. She was both
sorrowful and satisfied as she spoke to them. “I feared this very thing
would happen,” she told them. “You understand now, do you not?”
They did. The gulf between human and Forsaken could not be
bridged. Sylvanas felt particularly vindicated when Annie Lansing,
who had labored to create sachets and scarves to make the Forsaken
more appealing to the humans, trudged slowly back.
“You went to so much effort to please them,” Sylvanas said.
“I thought if they weren’t distracted by what we looked like…what
we smelled like…they could truly see us,” Annie replied sadly. “Truly
see me.”
“Who was it?”
There was a pause. “My mother.”
“A mother’s love is supposed to be unconditional,” Sylvanas said.
“Apparently it isn’t,” Annie said bitterly. She unwound the scarf, and
Sylvanas gazed unflinchingly into her maimed face. “We should have
listened to you, Dark Lady. We were terribly wrong.”
The words were sweet as honey. Sweet as victory. The council would
be divided, and the conflict among its members would destroy it. And
Sylvanas hadn’t had to do a thing.
Sylvanas ascended the wall with quick, lithe steps and pulled out her
spyglass. With any luck, she would see more newly enlightened
Forsaken returning back where they belonged. Where was the Prime
Governor in the midst of all this? Was she shaken by the attrition?
Sylvanas found her. And all her satisfaction evaporated.
Vellcinda stood easily and comfortably next to the cloaked and
hooded priestess Faol had brought with him. The Prime Governor
looked toward the keep, upward, to someone atop it. And then she
waved.
Quickly Sylvanas moved the spyglass, the images it revealed to her
veering about madly until they lit upon the figure of Stormwind’s king.
Anduin, smiling, was waving back. As Sylvanas watched, fury boiling
inside her, he put his hand on his heart and bowed.
Bowed.
To Vellcinda Benton, the Prime Governor of the Desolate Council.
Sylvanas opened her mouth to order the retreat. But no. Not yet.
This was not enough to convict Vellcinda in the eyes of the council.
Sylvanas needed to tread carefully.
To Nathanos she said, “I want someone watching Vellcinda at all
times. And,” she added, “I want that priestess watched, too.”
ARATHI HIGHLANDS FIELD
She laughs like a little girl.
Almost like a living thing.
Calia’s heart was full, so full. She tried to burn this moment into her
mind so that she would remember it when she woke with achingly
empty arms from the nightmares that still haunted her dreams. When
she would hear ugly words uttered by both sides of Azeroth’s
seemingly endless war between Horde and Alliance. She would
remember standing in this field while the grown boy of sunshine
waved to the woman whose husband had tended him his whole life.
She would remember this day and all its gifts, as the day when
everything began to change.
“I did bring something for him to give to Wyll wherever they buried
him.”
Elsie patted her chest, touching a simple golden ring that hung from
a chain around her neck. “I want to wear it until the last possible
moment, and then I’ll put it on the table. It’s my wedding ring. I wore
it till the day I died…and after, too, until I just couldn’t.” She indicated
her bony fingers. “It becomes hard to keep rings on. Or fingers, for
that matter. But I kept this. I’d be so grateful if you made sure it
reaches the king.”
The priestess stared at the ring and thought of her family. Of her
child, whom she imagined as having grown up to be like Philia: brave
and loyal and kind. Of her own husband, who had kept her secret and
loved her for who she was. Of all the people of Lordaeron, who didn’t
deserve what had happened to them and who had struggled on
bravely. Of every one of those on the field today, brave enough to look
past outer ugliness to an inner beauty, or, conversely, brave enough to
overcome their fear of rejection and see loved ones again as such, not
as the enemy. Of Philia, who wanted to hug her father. Of Emma and
her sons, reunited in a mother’s twilight years. Of the untold numbers
of people just like them, on both sides, yearning to be united.
Of her brother, who was responsible for all the pain, all the loss.
A Menethil had done this.
A Menethil would have to fix it.
F
or several long moments Anduin stood watching, a smile playing
about his lips. He recalled his first experience with the Conclave,
how it felt to be walking into a place of complete safety, to see races
that might otherwise be slitting one another’s throats laughing
together, or discussing philosophies, or researching, or simply sitting
side by side in quiet, joyful coexistence.
And now similar scenes were unfolding beneath him, but ones of
possibly even greater import to the future of Azeroth. He watched
Calia, who had hidden in a ditch for two days while enraged mindless
creatures swarmed and searched above her, move about the crowd,
speaking to small groups and blessing them. He’d watched her heal
Emma, whose reunion with not one but all three of her sons had been
almost more than she could handle. He’d watched Parqual and Philia
respond joyfully and freely to each other, as if death had not separated
them at all.
Calia was too far away for Anduin to make out her expression, but
she lifted her arm and waved. Standing beside the priestess was a
Forsaken woman who appeared not to have an Alliance family
member. Glancing at Calia, she, too, lifted her arm and waved to the
king of Stormwind. This had to be the Prime Governor, Elsie Benton.
Anduin couldn’t suppress a grin as he waved back and impulsively
gave a quick bow.
“That’s not how you pat yourself on the back.”
Anduin laughed and turned to Genn, clapping the older man on the
shoulder. “I confess, I might want to do a little back patting. But I
think the congratulations belongs to them. Those down there. The
courage it had to have taken for any of them to be willing to do this…
it’s almost unfathomable.”
He expected an irritated retort. Instead, Genn Greymane was silent,
as if seriously considering Anduin’s words. And that, Anduin thought,
was a victory right there.
ARATHI HIGHLANDS FIELD
Philia had believed that her father as he was now would not be too
different from the man she’d loved so much. She was discovering as
they spoke and ambled around the field together that she was both
wrong and right.
Parqual’s appearance, especially up close, had shocked her initially.
For a brief moment, though she would never tell him, horror and
disgust had closed her throat and urged her body to flee. But then he
had smiled. And it was her papa’s smile.
Different—oh, yes. Changed beyond imagining. But he was still
himself. Some things he had forgotten, and that pained her. But in
many ways, he was still so much himself that she could scarcely
believe it.
At one point, they were chatting happily about history, a topic about
which they were both passionate. Without thinking, Philia blurted out,
“Oh, Papa, you should write about Arthas and what happened that
day!”
Horrified, she put a hand to her mouth as her father turned very
still. “I’m so sorry,” she said. “I shouldn’t have—”
“No, it’s all right,” Parqual replied quickly. “It’s something that I’ve
thought about. A firsthand account. Primary sources are the most
important, you know.”
Philia did know, and she smiled slightly.
“I never did, because everyone who would read it already has their
own firsthand account. But now…”
The possibilities. “Papa—you could write it, and we could share it
with the Alliance! We only know rumors and whispers. You could let
us all know what really happened!”
He looked at her sadly. “I don’t think our Dark Lady will permit a
second meeting, my dear.”
Philia felt as though her heart had plunged to her toes. “Is…is this
our only chance to see each other?”
“It may well be.”
She shook her head. “No. No, I won’t accept that. I’ve only just
found you again, Papa. I won’t lose you a second time. There has to be
a way!”
Philia expected more sad denials, but instead her father was silent.
His lambent gaze was not on her but on the woman who had been
pointed out as the leader of the Desolate Council. Elsie Benton stood
now with the human priestess who had been so kind to the Forsaken.
As if feeling his gaze, the priestess turned her head and looked at
Parqual.
“I think we may have found that way,” Parqual murmured. Gently,
he placed a hand on his daughter’s back. “Come. There are people I
would like you to meet.”
—
Calia continued to keep her eyes on the field as she spoke with Elsie. It
looked as though all those who remained were having positive
conversations with their loved ones. She heard laughter and saw
smiles. This is how it should be. The people of Lordaeron haven’t been
free to be who or what they wish to be. For this moment, they are.
There was Osric, talking to his friend Tomas. Over there, two sisters
were reunited. There was Ol’ Emma, whom Calia had healed, looking
ten years younger as she smiled at her children. And Parqual and
Philia were coming to join them. They spoke for a few moments; Calia
was too far away to hear what they said.
Parqual said something to his daughter, then headed alone toward
Calia. She felt a flicker of concern; he shouldn’t be approaching her
like this. No one was supposed to know that she and Parqual knew
each other. Loudly, he said, “Priestess…may this Forsaken have your
blessing?”
“Of course,” she replied.
He bent his head, whispering to her, “We need you now. It’s time.”
“Wh-what?”
“You’ll see. Be ready.”
Calia steadied herself and called for the Light’s blessing. It came,
bathing him in its warm, gold-white glow. Parqual grimaced; the Holy
Light healed Forsaken, but it was not pleasant for them. With a nod of
appreciation, he turned and rejoined the group. She watched them,
alert now. For a while, they simply chatted. And then, too casually,
Philia and Parqual walked away from the Felstones. After a moment,
the Felstone family, too, began to walk. Slowly and indirectly, so as not
to attract too much attention, they were moving from the center of the
field toward Stromgarde Keep.
Saa’ra’s words rushed back to Calia so swiftly that she staggered.
There are things you must do before that peace will be granted to
you. Things that you must understand, that you must integrate into
yourself. People who need your help. What one needs in order to heal
will always come one’s way, but sometimes it is hard to recognize it.
Sometimes, the most beautiful and important gifts come wrapped in
pain and blood.
Was this the moment she had been thinking of ever since she had
found her way to the Netherlight Temple and Archbishop Faol? So
much had fallen into place so perfectly: the Desolate Council, Anduin’s
noble call for this gathering. And now, spontaneously, human and
Forsaken had taken a step so courageous that Calia felt both inspired
and ashamed.
Yes. Parqual was right.
It was time.
She whirled toward Elsie, her hood falling off with her movement.
“Elsie, there’s something you must know. And I pray to the Light that
has sent me here this day that you will understand—and support it.”
She swallowed hard. “Support…me.”
ARATHI HIGHLANDS, THORADIN’S WALL
“Something is wrong,” Sylvanas murmured. “But I cannot put my
finger on precisely what.”
The priestess had said something to Vellcinda that had the Prime
Governor agitated. No one else on the field seemed to notice. They
were too busy taking strolls with their loved ones.
And that was it.
“They’re defecting,” Sylvanas snapped.
Nathanos was instantly alert, scanning the field with his spyglass.
“Several of them are moving in the direction of Stromgarde Keep,” he
confirmed, “but that may not be intentional.”
“Let’s find out,” Sylvanas said. She lifted the horn to her lips and
blew three long, clear notes.
Now to see who comes when called—and who breaks and runs.
At that moment, one of the priests returned, urging her bat to go as
quickly as it could. She looked shocked and sickened.
“My lady!” she gasped. “The priestess—I didn’t recognize her until
her hood fell off—I can scarce believe it—”
“Spit it out,” Sylvanas snarled, her body taut as a bowstring.
“My lady—it’s Calia Menethil!”
Menethil.
The name was laden, heavy with meaning and portent. It was the
name of the monster who had made her. Who had slaughtered and
destroyed. It was the name of the king who had ruled Lordaeron. And
it was the name of that king’s daughter—his heir.
And to think she had thought the king of Stormwind an ingenuous
fool. He played politics better than she could possibly have imagined.
Anduin Wrynn had brought a usurper with him. And now, that girl,
that damned human child who ought to be long dead, was taking
Sylvanas’s own people to join the Alliance.
“My lady, what are your orders?”
ARATHI HIGHLANDS FIELD
In the center of the field, Elsie stared at the queen of Lordaeron. “It’s
not possible,” she said. But she knew it was true. Calia had taken care
to keep her face hidden in the shadow of her hood. But now the hood
was gone and she had turned to look directly at Elsie, and Elsie could
not look away.
“You are my people, and I want to help you,” Calia pleaded. “I only
came to observe, to begin to get to know the Forsaken of Lordaeron.”
“Undercity,” Elsie said. “We live in the Undercity.”
“You didn’t once. You won’t have to live in the shadows anymore.
Just—please. Come walk with me. Parqual, the Felstones, all the
others—see them? They’re defecting. Anduin will shelter and protect
you all; I know he will!”
“But—the Dark Lady—”
As if in response, the horn sounded three sharp blasts. Elsie turned
her gray-green face back toward the wall and the Forsaken banner that
had been unfurled.
“I’m sorry, Your Majesty,” Elsie said. “I can’t betray my queen. Not
even for you.” She turned and shouted, “Retreat! Retreat!”
ARATHI HIGHLANDS, STROMGARDE KEEP
Anduin heard the sound of the horn. Baffled, he looked down, trying to
ascertain what had caused it. As far as he could see, nothing had
changed from a moment—
He pressed his lips closed to prevent a groan from escaping. There
was sudden deep, dull pain inside him.
“What’s wrong, son?” Genn asked sharply.
“It is the bell,” Velen said somberly, sadly. Turalyon looked
confused, but Greymane’s face went hard. He knew about the bell.
About the warning it meant to his young king.
“The retreat,” Anduin managed, grimacing as the pain increased.
“It’s dangerous.” A second pain struck Anduin, different but even more
devastating to him. For this was not the bone-hurting ache of the
Divine Bell’s handiwork but the knife-sharp pain of a dream shattering
before his eyes. With a sick jolt, Anduin saw that the tiny figures who
had stood at attention on Thoradin’s Wall were now mounted on bats
and flying toward the field.
Dark rangers.
“It’s over,” he whispered, and leaned on the parapet. “Get them to
safety before it’s too late!”
On the field below, spread out like markers in the map room, were
other tiny figures. Some of them were heading back toward Thoradin’s
Wall. Some were returning to the keep.
And some still stood in the field as if paralyzed.
The pain wasn’t abating, and Anduin clenched his jaw against it as
he looked back at the wall. He forced his fisted hands to open and
lifted the spyglass.
His mind saw things with a strange, swift clarity, and he
immediately picked out Archbishop Faol and Calia. The former was
close to the wall, urging his charges to rush through the gates to safety.
But Calia stayed in the field, arguing with Elsie Benton. The priestess’s
hood was down.
Calia…what are you doing?
Calia turned away from the Prime Governor, ran forward a few
paces, cupped her hands around her mouth, and shouted, “Forsaken! I
am Calia Menethil! Head for the keep!”
“What is that girl doing?” shouted Genn.
But Anduin was not listening. His gaze was riveted on the pair of
women in the field, one human, one Forsaken, and at that moment
Elsie Benton dropped like a stone with a black-fletched arrow
protruding from her chest.
Calia turned back toward Elsie, but she was too late. A look of horror
was on her face, but there was nothing she could do now for the
murdered Prime Governor. Calia shouted again, “To the keep! Run!”
Anduin jerked back, his mind reeling. Now he saw that everyone,
humans and Forsaken both, had broken into a run.
Sylvanas had moved to the offensive, just like that. Right under their
watchful eyes.
And he, Anduin Wrynn, had put innocent unarmed civilians directly
in her path. The only way to correct his terrible mistake was to do
everything he could to save them, even if it meant starting a war.
But even with that thought, the pain did not ebb. Everyone was
shouting at him, asking for orders, telling him one thing while
someone else was screaming another. But Anduin couldn’t hear any of
them. He knew that he needed to listen to what this strange,
contradictory gift of the Divine Bell had to say to him. He squeezed his
eyes shut and pleaded silently, Light, what is happening? What can I
do?
The answer came. It was swift, blunt, and brutal.
Protect.
And mourn.
“No,” he whispered, protesting even as he accepted the words. His
eyes snapped open.
Genn was raging at him. “—got to get our soldiers out there and—”
“—stand ready to defend our people by—” It was Turalyon, radiant
with the Light. Anduin couldn’t speak, but he nodded to Turalyon that
he should proceed.
Bats swooped and darted over the field, their riders showering it
with black lines.
Each one struck its target. And Anduin understood.
“Genn,” he said, his voice a harsh rasp. “Genn—she’s killing them.
She’s killing them all.”
Sylvanas Windrunner had kept her word. Her rangers were not
attacking humans.
They were attacking Forsaken. Even those who were returning to
the wall.
This is wrong, he thought. And I am wrong for standing here.
He made his decision, and the pain ebbed at once. “Whatever
happens”—he called over his shoulder, racing toward the one
remaining gryphon left—“do not attack the rangers unless they attack
us. Is that clear? I need your word!”
“You have it,” Turalyon stated. Anduin wondered if the paladin had
some inkling of what he was about to do or if he was simply being a
good soldier. Genn, however, could never be counted on simply to
obey without protest.
“What are you planning?” he demanded. “These aren’t your people.
They’re hers! She’ll kill you, boy!”
Anduin was about to find out.
F
or a ghastly moment, the slaughter around Calia Menethil
overlapped and blended with the memory of those two terrifying
days years ago when she had lain motionless in a ditch while crazed
undead rampaged only a few feet away. She was frozen and could only
watch in horror as the dark rangers of Sylvanas Windrunner loosed
arrows upon the members of the Desolate Council.
They had come with no hatred in their hearts for Sylvanas. These
were only people who wanted to see friends and family they thought
were forever beyond their reach. But their warchief, their own Dark
Lady, she who had made them and above all others should be
safeguarding their well-being, had ordered her rangers to shoot into
their midst.
They aren’t even armed, Calia’s mind said stupidly, as if that were
the most important thing in this horrifying betrayal. They had brought
only rings and love letters and toys onto this field. They wanted
nothing other than kindness and connection.
I didn’t mean for this to happen, she thought. But that didn’t
matter. Nor did it matter that the initial idea to seek sanctuary with
the Alliance had come from Parqual. They would have been her people
had they lived, and they were her people in undeath, too. And she
would not scurry to safety like a coward while her people were being
butchered by a jealous usurper queen for daring to race toward what
they believed to be a sanctuary.
She was Calia Menethil. Heir to the throne of Lordaeron. And she
would fight—and die—to defend her people. She just had to get them
safely to Stromgarde Keep and maintain a barrier of Light between
them and the arrows that continued to claim them.
“To the keep!” she shouted. “Run!”
And she hastened to do whatever she could to shield her people
from the false queen’s rage.
ARATHI HIGHLANDS, THORADIN’S WALL
“My queen, what are you doing?”
Sylvanas heard the shock in her normally calm champion’s voice.
She chose to overlook it. On the surface, what was unfolding below—
the firing of arrows, the screams and pleas of the Desolate Council as
they tasted their Last Deaths could seem perplexing and disturbing.
“The only thing I can do and still hang on to my kingdom as it is,”
she said. “They were defecting.”
“Some were running back here, to safety,” he replied.
“They were,” she agreed. “But how much of that was fear? How
tempted were they until that point?” She shook her head. “No,
Nathanos. I cannot take the risk. The only Desolate Council members I
trust are the ones who returned to me early on, broken and bitter.
Truly Desolate. All the others…I cannot allow that sentiment, that
hope, to grow. It is an infection ready to spread. I have to cut it out.”
Slowly, accepting her words, he nodded. “You are letting the
humans go.”
“I have no wish to fight a war when I’m not ready to do so.” She
gazed at the growing number of motionless Forsaken corpses on the
field. So many had opted for death. “I don’t think the boy king
arranged this. It was stupid. He is naive, but he is not stupid. He
would not risk war for a handful of Forsaken merchants and laborers.”
Her initial suspicion had evaporated quickly. If he had intended this
defection, he would have planned better for it. No, Sylvanas placed the
blame on the Menethil girl, as reckless and deceitful as her loathed
brother. She had gulled both the king of Stormwind and the warchief
of the Horde.
And she was about to die for it.
“I grow tired of the game,” Sylvanas said. “I will kill the usurper
myself. And then the Forsaken will return home, where they belong.
With me.”
She gave her champion a cold smile. “One of the Desolate Council’s
desires was not to be reborn again and again. So I have given them two
gifts today. A reunion with their loved ones and their final deaths.
“And now,” she said, grasping her bow and leaping lightly atop a
waiting bat, “I am about to consign Calia Menethil to the annals of
history’s dead royalty.”
ARATHI HIGHLANDS FIELD
Anduin prayed to the Light as he never had before. These people—
both human and Forsaken—had done nothing but try to see past their
old hatred, their fear. They had reached out in love and in trust—
—trust in me—
—to do what was right, and good, and kind.
Even as he urged the gryphon on to his greatest speed, he realized
with a sick, sinking horror that he would be too late.
Up ahead, Osric Strang ran beside his friend Tomas. The young king
reached for the Light, but before he could release it upon the running
Forsaken, an arrow sang past his ear and implanted itself in Tomas’s
bony chest. It went clear through, piercing the spine with inhuman
precision.
No…
Anduin glanced around wildly. There was Philia, with her father,
Parqual, running with her arm around him protectively, as if she were
the parent, not he. But the arrows of the dark rangers were as
merciless as those who fired them. They struck true, and Parqual
tumbled in midstride. Philia fell to her knees, her arms going around
the decaying body and her sobs ripping Anduin to shreds.
He could reach none of them in time. Not even any of the Felstone
boys, who were running toward the keep as fast as their long legs could
go. One of them cradled the frightened, elderly Emma in his arms,
trying to shield her with his own body, not understanding that he and
his undead brothers were the ones in danger, not their mother.
Three arrows sang. Three arrows reached their targets. Three bodies
toppled to the ground, their mother hitting the earth hard and crying
out their names.
The other Forsaken on this lethal field were much too far away.
Anduin knew he could not save them. But he could save Emma.
He brought the gryphon down and jumped off his back, gathering
up the weeping woman and calling to the Light. She has lost them all,
now. Please, give her hope as well as healing. Her boys would want
her to live.
Emma’s eyelids fluttered. She opened them and gazed up at him.
Her eyes were swollen with tears. “All of them,” she said.
“I know,” Anduin said. “And you must live for all of them, since they
cannot.” He lifted her—she was so light, so frail—and eased her atop
the gryphon. “He’ll take you back safely.”
She nodded, summoning her courage, and held on tightly as the
beast gathered himself and ascended into a sky crowded with bats and
gryphons bearing dark rangers and priests. Despite the provocation,
Anduin’s priests had not attacked, for which Anduin was grateful.
Sylvanas Windrunner had killed her own people. But she had
ordered restraint when it came to humans. At least thus far. Anduin’s
gaze swept the field. There were a few more Stormwind residents
running toward the keep, but they drew no fire from the dark rangers.
But a warning began to sound in the back of his mind. If they were
done with the slaughter of their own kind and they did not want to
attack the humans who had participated in the Gathering, why were
they here?
And the answer slammed into his head. He frantically began to scan
the field for the one person, living or undead, who could possibly pose
a threat to Sylvanas Windrunner: Calia Menethil.
She was running as fast as she could. A warm golden field enveloped
her: the Light, shielding her from harm. For now. Anduin cast a spell
on himself as he raced after her, trying to close the distance between
them.
A shadow passed overhead. Anduin looked up, and his heart surged
as a single bat flew over him, low and close, an intimidation and a
taunt. He caught a glimpse of glowing red eyes, and then the bat was
gone, moving forward more swiftly than he could ever run toward the
Light-shielded uncrowned queen of Lordaeron.
Sylvanas was running her down like a hawk would a rabbit. The
shield would protect Calia, but it would not last forever, and then there
would be a few heartbeats during which she would be completely
vulnerable. If he could just reach her in time, he could call down
another shield for her. But his decision to send the elderly Emma back
to safety on his gryphon meant that he was relying on his own two feet.
He called on the Light for strength and speed and a shield of his own.
He knew that he had made himself the perfect target. So be it. If
Sylvanas wanted war, let her start one.
But even as he closed the distance, he knew it would not be enough.
The cry of denial scraped Anduin’s throat raw as he uttered it. The
world around him seemed to shatter like glass; all its bright shards of
hope and idealism and joy were rendered jagged and sharp.
The glowing aura of protection around the true queen of Lordaeron
shimmered, then vanished.
He watched, only a few yards too far away to save Calia, as Sylvanas
Windrunner drew back a black arrow, slowly, languidly, savoring the
moment, and then let it fly.
Violet tendrils of smoke twined around the weapon as it flew
unerringly toward its target. Time seemed to slow as Calia, her hood
down and her blond hair flying, was struck in the center of the back—
directly through the heart. She arched and fell forward, hitting the
ground hard, arms and legs akimbo, making her last movements
clumsy and graceless.
Anduin called on the Light, but he was too far, too slow, and there
was no response.
Calia Menethil, heir to the throne of Lordaeron, was dead.
Now, past all ability to help, to heal, he reached her and dropped to
his knees beside her. Once more, a shadow fell over his body as well as
his heart, and he looked up, devastated and furious, to see Sylvanas
Windrunner smirking down at him, another arrow nocked to the
bowstring.
The air was filled with the sound of beating membranous wings as
she was joined by a host of her rangers. They, too, had arrows nocked,
all aimed at him.
A spurt of fear raced through him, then absolute white-hot fury. The
shield of Light still glimmered around him, but it would not last. He
had a choice. He could save himself and immediately run to the keep,
protected by the Light, or he could gather Calia’s limp frame and,
vulnerable to even a single ordinary arrow, bear her from the field.
Turalyon kept calling this a battlefield. I kept telling him he was
wrong.
Silently, Anduin gathered Calia’s still-warm body in his arms and
rose. He looked up at the dark rangers, at their dark mistress, and
gazed evenly into those glowing red orbs.
“You don’t want a war,” he said calmly.
“Don’t I?” She drew back on the string farther. Anduin could hear
the bone bow creak. “If I kill you today, too, I’ll have a matched set of
dead royals: a queen and a king.”
He shook his head. “If you wanted war, we wouldn’t be having this
conversation. But I have a right to declare it. You promised not to kill
any of my people.” He lifted Calia’s body, letting her still frame say all
that needed to be said.
“Ah, but she is not one of yours, is she?” Sylvanas’s voice had a cold
but angry edge to it, and the hair along Anduin’s arms lifted. “She is—
was—a citizen of Lordaeron. Its queen. You brought a usurper onto the
field, Anduin Wrynn. I would be well within my rights to consider that
a hostile action. Who violated the treaty first?”
“She came as a healer!”
“She leaves as a corpse. Did you think I would not discover what you
had done?”
“I swear to you by the Light, I acted in good faith. I gave no orders to
your people to defect. You can believe that or not. But if you strike me
down, my people and all of Stormwind’s allies will retaliate. And they
will do so holding nothing back.”
Her eyes narrowed. Anduin knew she understood the lesson of this
day’s tragic events. She was not universally loved among her people.
He was. She ruled with an iron fist. He ruled with compassion. Neither
of them was ready for a war. Anduin said a silent prayer that Sylvanas
would not start one.
The silence stretched on. “I grieve for the fallen today,” Anduin said.
“But they did not die by my hand. Calia Menethil was indeed not my
subject. As for what she thought she could accomplish…I truly do not
know. Whatever it was, she paid the price for it. I am going to take her
body back to the Netherlight Temple and the Conclave she so loved. If
you want a war, you can start it now.”
He turned, feeling a phantom tingle in his exposed back as he began
to walk calmly, without rushing, toward Stromgarde Keep. The shield
around him faded and disappeared.
Nothing happened. Then he heard the bats utter their unnerving,
high-pitched sounds and a rapid, loud flapping of leathery wings. And
then they were gone.
There would be no war between the Alliance and the Horde today.
T
he next few days were a blur of regret, pain, and soul-searching
for Anduin Wrynn.
Genn, predictably, had been furious, but to Anduin’s surprise, he
had bitten his tongue when the young king walked through the gates of
Stromgarde carrying the body of Calia Menethil. Faol was
heartbroken, receiving the corpse of his beloved friend humbly from
Anduin’s arms, as stunned as Anduin had been at Calia’s turn and
riddled with remorse for not anticipating it.
“I would never have brought her today if I’d had the slightest idea,”
he said.
“I know,” Anduin said. “Take her home. And I will do the same for
my people. I’ll come to the temple as soon as I can.”
It tore at him to see the people who once had been so full of hope
look so shocked and devastated as they boarded the ships that had
borne them to the Arathi Highlands and its ghosts. Even those who
had not parted well from their Forsaken counterparts looked shaken.
Anduin usually was able to find the right words at the right time, but
now he found none.
What could he tell them, really? How could he possibly comfort
them? There was no easy, obvious road back from this, and so he
retired to his cabin, deep in prayer for guidance.
It came in the form of a knock on the door and the appearance of an
old friend. “I do not wish to disturb,” Velen said.
Anduin smiled wearily. “You never could,” he said, and invited the
draenei inside. He offered some refreshment, but Velen declined
gracefully.
“I will not stay long,” Velen said. “But I felt I should come. You are
king now, not the youth I guided only a few short years ago back on
the Exodar, but I will always be there if you ever wish what wisdom
the Light sees fit for me to give you.”
Velen doubtless thought the reminder of Anduin’s time among the
draenei would be comforting. But all Anduin could think of was how
much he longed for those days. For that peace. And before he knew
what was happening, he had blurted out, “I feel helpless, Velen. I
promised my people a reunion with their loved ones. Instead, they
watched them be slaughtered. I want to comfort them, but I have no
words. I miss my time learning from you. I miss the Exodar. I miss
O’ros.”
Velen smiled sadly. “We all do,” he said, “but we cannot go back to
happier times. We can only live in the present, and right now that
present is painful. But we do have a way to be with a naaru. We are
priests, Anduin, but we cannot heal others until we are steady and
calm within ourselves. Go to the Netherlight Temple now. Share your
grief with Faol and in so doing, help each other. Speak with Saa’ra. See
what it has to say to you. There is time. Then you can greet your people
on the docks and, Light willing, know what to say to help their
wounded hearts.”
Anduin smiled. “I’ll never be as wise as you, old friend.”
Velen chuckled and shook his head ruefully. “My only wisdom is to
understand that I am not.”
THE NETHERLIGHT TEMPLE
When Anduin entered the temple, he saw at once that something was
happening. It seemed as though everyone in the temple had clustered
around the entrance to Saa’ra’s chamber, which was marked by its
constant radiance. Anduin, frowning, hastened toward the crowd,
making his way through the priests who stood or knelt, silent,
reverent. Up ahead, Anduin could see the radiant lilac form of Saa’ra,
and despite his heartache and confusion, he felt the naaru’s
comforting brush upon his spirit.
Calia Menethil’s body hovered in front of Saa’ra. She lay in the air as
if she were sleeping, her hands folded on her breast. Her blond hair
gleamed almost as brightly as the naaru itself, falling softly, her gold
and white robes draping her slender frame.
Faol knelt in front of the crystalline entity, his head bowed in prayer.
High Priestess Ishanah stepped beside Anduin and said quietly,
“Something is happening to Calia. Her flesh has not begun to
decompose. Faol has been with her since he brought her here.” The
draenei turned, looking down at Anduin as she said, “Saa’ra told him
to wait for you, my young king.”
A shiver ran down Anduin’s spine, and he swallowed. He took a
deep breath and stepped toward the archbishop. “I’m here, Your
Grace,” he said quietly. “What would you have me do?”
Faol turned his face up to Anduin’s. “I’m not quite sure,” he said.
“But Saa’ra was insistent that you were to be part of this.”
And then Saa’ra, who had been silent, spoke in their minds.
Calia would come to me when the dreams of what was past were
too painful to endure, Saa’ra said. I cautioned her to have patience.
There were things she had to do before the dreams would cease,
things she must understand. People who would need her help.
And I assured her of this seemingly strange truth: that sometimes
the most beautiful and important gifts come wrapped in pain and
blood.
The truth of those words hit Anduin’s heart. Those were the gifts
that no one ever wanted, that one would do anything not to have
bestowed. But they were also indeed as Saa’ra said: beautiful and
important.
There will be no more of those battles for her now. Calia Menethil
will be freed from the pains of the living, from the nightmares that
once rent her heart.
She understood that those on that field were her people. And she
accepted that responsibility by giving her life to try to save them. Not
human, as they were when she was young, but Forsaken, as they
were in that moment.
Light and dark. Forsaken priest and human priest. Together you
shall bring her back as the Light and she herself would have her be.
Anduin’s mouth was dry, and he trembled. He looked at Faol, but
the priest only nodded. They moved wordlessly to Calia’s side,
standing as she hovered in midair, and each of them took one of her
small, pale hands.
Bring her back as the Light and she herself would have her be,
Saa’ra had said. He didn’t know what the naaru had meant by the
words, and he suspected that Faol didn’t either.
But somehow, he knew, Calia did.
Anduin felt the Light come to him, warm and calming. It seeped
through his body, soothing his spirit and his tumultuous mind. It was
a familiar sensation, yet there was something different. He usually
experienced the Light’s power flowing through him like a river. But
now it seemed like a whole ocean was utilizing him as a vessel. Anduin
felt a quick flicker of fear. Would he be able to contain and direct
something this powerful?
He anticipated that he would feel overwhelmed, stretched to his
limit, but the tide of Light that swept through him now was one that
reinvigorated him even as it asked him to be fully present, to give all of
himself to the task ahead.
Yes, he said in his heart. I will.
The Light limned him in its warm hue, and it chased around the still
yet completely intact body of the queen of Lordaeron and whirled
about the Forsaken archbishop. Anduin felt it swell like a wave, then
crest and break, emptying him but not depleting him.
The cold hand in his squeezed.
Anduin gasped as Calia opened her eyes. They glowed a soft, gentle
white, not the eerie yellow hue of a Forsaken’s. A smile curved a face
that had no flush of life to it. Slowly her body tilted from horizontal to
vertical, and her feet settled onto the stone floor.
Calia Menethil was dead, but she lived. She was no mindless
undead, but she was not Forsaken, either. She had been raised by a
human and a Forsaken both using the power of the Light, bathed in
the radiance of a naaru.
“Calia,” said Faol, and his voice trembled. “Welcome back, dear girl.
I didn’t dare hope that you would return to us!”
“Someone once told me that hope is what you have when all other
things have failed you,” Calia said to him. Her voice was echoing,
sepulchral, but like Faol’s, it was warm and kind. Her white gaze went
to Anduin. She smiled gently. “Where there is hope, you make room
for healing, for all things that are possible—and some that are not.”
Anduin watched as everyone responded to Calia’s—what?
Resurrection? No, she was still dead. Dark gift? That wouldn’t be
accurate either, because it was the Light that had been present today.
There was nothing of darkness in this undead woman.
After a short time, though, she turned to Anduin and gave him a
rueful smile. “Thank you,” she said, “for helping the archbishop bring
me back.”
“The Light didn’t need my help,” he said.
“Well, then, for not abandoning me on the field.”
“I couldn’t do that.” He frowned and asked quietly, “Was that your
plan all along? To use my work on the Gathering as a chance to
reclaim your throne?”
Sorrow flitted across her pale face. “No. Not really. Come sit with
me.”
They found a small table, and everyone gave them privacy. “Ever
since I met Archbishop Faol, I had believed that one day, if I had the
chance, I could show that even though I was not Forsaken, I could
treat them as my people and rule them well. My brother had tried to
destroy them. I wanted to help them.”
“So when you heard about the Gathering, you wanted to
participate.”
She nodded. “Yes. I wanted to meet more Forsaken who were not
priests. I wanted to see how they would react to meeting their families.
But that was all I intended for the Gathering. I swear it.”
“I believe you,” he said, and he saw her visibly relax.
“I don’t deserve that, but thank you.”
He folded his hands on the table and looked at her piercingly. “So
what changed your mind?”
“Parqual Fintallas approached me and said that they—they needed
me now. That it was time. I didn’t know what he meant at first, but
then I realized they were defecting. I had a choice: support them,
reveal who I was, and get them and others to safety, or disavow them
and get them killed.” She looked away. “But I got them killed anyway.”
“You also almost started a war,” Anduin said, his voice hard. “You
could have been responsible for the deaths of hundreds of thousands.
Do you understand that?”
She looked chagrined. “I do now,” she said. “I was never taught how
to rule, Anduin, because no one expected me to. I never formally
studied politics or strategy. So when I got out there…”
“You just followed your heart,” Anduin said, his anger turning to
sorrow. “I understand that. But a ruler doesn’t always have that
luxury.”
“No. I am not yet ready to rule. But I wish to serve the people of
Lordaeron. They are my people, and now I am like them. It feels…
right.” She smiled. “I’ll learn. And from the archbishop, I’ll learn what
it’s like to be…this. To be undead yet walk in the Light.”
It should have been harrowing. It should have been ghoulish. But as
Calia Menethil, changed but still herself, gazed at the king of
Stormwind, all Anduin could think of were the naaru’s words: Calia
was freed forever from the nightmares that had haunted her.
And he was glad.
It was the only comfort on one of the bleakest days he had ever known.
Velen had advised Anduin to go to the Netherlight Temple, speak
with Saa’ra, and listen to what the naaru said. Then, Velen had
suggested that Anduin would be able to greet his people on the docks
and “Light willing, know what to say to help their wounded hearts.”
The draenei had been right.
When the ships had come into Stormwind Harbor, Anduin was
there to meet them but not to welcome them home. He was there to
take them back to the Arathi Highlands.
He brought with them the carvers of tombstones and the diggers of
graves. The people of Lordaeron—of the Undercity—would not be left
to rot, forgotten in a damp green field. Anduin had invited those who
wished to return to stay on the ship; others were welcome to go back to
their homes.
Most stayed.
Now he walked among them, watched but undisturbed by the
Forsaken who manned Galen’s Fall near Thoradin’s Wall, as they
identified, spoke words over, and buried those who had been brave
enough to try to move past prejudice and fear. Anduin listened as
humans told their stories about the fallen as the Forsaken were, at last,
laid to rest.
Velen might deflect compliments about his wisdom, but Anduin
knew better. This was healing. This was respect. When they buried
Jem, Jack, and Jake—Anduin did not think he would ever forget their
names—Emma broke down. Philia was there, slipping an arm around
her to support the older woman, her own eyes red with weeping.
“They’re gone now, every one of them,” Emma said. “I’m all alone.”
“No, you’re not,” Philia said. “We’ll help each other.”
—
Genn had returned to the Arathi Highlands with Anduin. He still
hadn’t had a chance to talk to the boy, and he wasn’t about to let him
return without accompanying him. Now he listened as Philia and
Emma comforted each other, and watched as Anduin, clearly deeply
moved, strode a few paces away.
Genn stepped up beside him.
“I knew cats were quiet, but you wolves are almost as stealthy,”
Anduin said.
Genn shrugged. “We know how to move to suit the task,” he said.
“So I am discovering…repeatedly.”
“I’ve gotten to know you rather well over the last few years,” Genn
said, ignoring the jab. “I’ve watched you grow up—a harder task for
you than it ought to have been. But nothing is easy in this world, it
seems.”
“No,” Anduin agreed. His blue eyes roamed the field. “Not even
keeping peace for a single day.”
“You should know by now that peace is one of the hardest things in
this or any world to keep, my boy,” Genn said, not unkindly.
Anduin shook his head in sorrow and disbelief. “I can’t blot out the
images of the Desolate Council running as fast as they could to what
they thought was a future with their loved ones. I feel responsible. For
them. And for them,” he said, gesturing to the living still moving on
the field.
“Sylvanas killed her own people, Anduin,” Genn reminded him. “Not
you.”
“Rationally, of course I know that. But it doesn’t matter. Not in my
bones. And not here.” Anduin placed a hand on his chest for a
moment, then let it fall. “Those who fell on this field did so because
King Anduin Wrynn of Stormwind had promised them they would be
safe as they reunited with their loved ones. And they died because of
that promise. Because of me.”
The bitterness in his voice was like acid. Genn, who had never heard
it from him before, fell silent. After a time, Anduin spoke.
“You’ve come to lecture me, obviously. Go ahead. I deserve every
word.”
Genn sniffed and rubbed his beard for a moment, his eyes on the
horizon. “Actually, I’ve come to apologize.”
Anduin’s head whipped around, and he didn’t bother to hide his
shock. “Apologize? What for? All you did was warn me against this.”
“You told me to watch. So I did. I listened, too.” He pointed at an
ear. “Wolves have excellent hearing. I watched the interactions. I saw
tears. I heard laughter. I saw fear give way to joy.”
He kept his gaze on the people of Stormwind honoring their dead as
he continued to speak.
“I saw other things, too. I saw a Stormwind guard head out onto this
field. He spoke with a Forsaken woman—his wife or his sister,
perhaps. But finally he shook his head and walked away from her, back
to the keep.”
Anduin’s brow furrowed in puzzlement, but he remained quiet.
“The Forsaken lowered her head and stood for a moment. Just…
stood there. And then, very slowly, she walked back to Thoradin’s
Wall.”
Now Genn faced Anduin. “There was no violence. No…anger, or
hate. Not even hard words, it seemed. And while those happy reunions
were remarkable, extraordinary, it struck me that this was even more
important. Because if humans and Forsaken could meet, with so much
emotion involved, and disagree—dislike or even be repelled by one
another—and simply walk away…”
Greymane shook his head. “All I’d seen from the Forsaken was
treachery, deceit, and a hunger to end life.” I watched my boy die in
my arms, giving his life to save mine, he thought but did not say. “I
saw ghastly, shambling monstrosities descend upon living beings with
no desire other than to snuff out that light of life. I’d never seen what I
saw that day. I never thought I could.”
Anduin listened.
“I believe in the Light,” Genn stated. “I’ve seen it, benefited from it,
so I have to. But I’ve never really felt it. I couldn’t feel it from Faol. I
just saw what I viewed as a gut-wrenching travesty—an old friend,
dead, animated like some sort of joke. Spouting things that couldn’t
possibly be true.
“And then he said something that was true. Too true. It cut like a
blade, and I couldn’t bear that.”
Genn took a deep breath. “But he was right. You were right. I still
think what was done to the Forsaken against their will was horrifying.
But it’s clear to me now that some of them haven’t been broken by it.
Some of them are still the people they once were. So I was wrong, and
I apologize.”
Anduin nodded. A smile crossed his face fleetingly, then was gone. It
was clear he was still burdened with guilt and stubbornly wouldn’t
relinquish the pain of it. Not yet.
“You were right about Sylvanas,” Anduin said, that cold bitterness
lingering in his voice. “Light knows, I wish I’d listened.”
“I wasn’t right about her, either,” Genn said, startling Anduin for the
second time in as many minutes. “Not entirely. I knew she couldn’t let
this go by without doing something. I thought she’d attack us. Not her
own people.”
Anduin winced and turned away. “She may have killed them, but I
promised the Desolate Council safe passage. Those deaths are on my
conscience. They will haunt me.”
“No, they won’t,” Genn said. “Because you kept your end of the
bargain. No one realized how poorly Sylvanas Windrunner could deal
with anything that wasn’t complete and utter obeisance. If you ask me,
the Desolate Council signed their own death warrants simply by
existing as a governing body. She’d have done something to them
sooner or later. Their ghosts, if Forsaken can have ghosts, won’t haunt
you, my boy. You did something wonderful for them.”
Now Anduin did turn to Greymane, looking him full in the eye.
“Answer me this: Would it have been enough for you, Genn? To see
your son one more time and pay for that one encounter with your
life?”
The question was utterly unexpected, and for a moment Genn was
taken aback. Old pain shot through him, and he tightened his jaw. He
didn’t want to answer, but there was something in the youth’s face that
would not let the older man refuse.
“Yes,” he said at last. “Yes. It would have.”
And it was true.
Anduin took a deep, shuddering breath and nodded at Genn.
“Nonetheless, it is a tragedy, and it’s done any chance of peace great
harm. It’s destroyed the prospect of working together with the Horde
to heal the world. Azerite will continue to threaten the balance of
power. It’s hurt the Alliance, too. Sylvanas used a moment that could
have been a true turning point as a chance to eliminate people whom
she viewed as her enemies. And she did it so smoothly, so well, that I
can’t even call her on it. She didn’t break her word. Calia was a wouldbe usurper. I can’t ask Stormwind to go to war because the warchief of
the Horde chose to execute individuals she will now paint as traitors.
So she gets away with it. She’s won. She eliminated the opposition,
killed the rightful heir to Lordaeron, and did it all while looking like a
noble leader for not attacking the Alliance and starting a war.”
Genn said nothing. He didn’t need to. He simply stood next to
Anduin and let the young king sort it out on his own.
The minutes passed, and then, finally, Anduin spoke.
“I will never, ever stop hoping for peace,” he said. His voice
trembled with leashed emotion. “I have seen too much good in too
many people to paint them all as evil and worthy of slaughter. And I
will also never stop believing that people can change. But I realize now
that I’ve been like a farmer expecting to harvest crops from a poisoned
field. It’s simply not possible.”
Greymane tensed. The boy was leading to something.
“People can change,” Anduin repeated. “But some people will never
—never—desire to do so. Sylvanas Windrunner is one of those.”
He took a deep breath. Sorrow and grim resolve made him look
older. Genn had seen similar expressions on the faces of those who
had been tasked with a heartbreaking duty.
When the boy spoke, Genn was glad of the words but saddened by
his need to say them.
“I believe,” said Anduin Llane Wrynn, “that Sylvanas Windrunner is
well and truly lost.”

 The wind shrieked like a child in pain.
 The herd of shoveltusk huddled together for warmth, their thick, shaggy coats protecting them
from the worst of the storm. They formed a circle, with the calves shivering and bleating in the center.
Their heads, each crowned with a massive antler, drooped toward the snow- covered earth, eyes shut
against the whirling snow. Their own breath frosted their muzzles as they planted themselves and
endured.
 …In their various dens, the wolves and bears waited out the storms, one with the comfort of their
pack, the other solitary and resigned. Whatever their hunger, nothing would drive them forth until
after the keening wind had ceased its weeping and the blinding snow had worn itself out.

 The wind, roaring in from the ocean to beat at the village of Kamagua, tore at the hides that
stretched over frames made of the bones of great sea creatures. When the storm passed, the tuskarr
whose home this had been for years uncounted knew they would need to repair or replace nets and
traps. Their dwellings, sturdy though they were, were always harmed when this storm descended.
They had all gathered inside the large group dwelling that had been dug deep into the earth, lacing the
flaps tight against the storm and lighting smoky oil lamps.
 Elder Atuik waited in stoic silence. He had seen many of these storms over the last seven years.
Long had he lived, the length and yellowness of his tusks and the wrinkles on his brown skin testament
to the fact. But these storms were more than storms, were more than natural. He glanced at the young
ones, shivering not with cold, not the tuskarr, but with fear.
 “He dreams,” one of them murmured, eyes bright, whiskers bristling.
 “Silence,” snapped Atuik, more gruffly than he had intended. The child, startled, fell silent, and once
again the only sound was the aching sob of the snow and wind.

 It rose like the smoke, the deep bellowing noise, wordless but full of meaning; a chant, carried by a
dozen voices. The sounds of drums and rattles and bone striking bone formed a fierce undercurrent to
the wordless call. The worst of the wind’s anger was deflected from the taunka village by the circle of
posts and hides, and the lodges, their curving roofs arching over a large interior space in defiance of the
hardships of this land, were strong.
 Over the sound of deep and ancient ritual, the wind’s cry could still be heard. The dancer, a shaman
by the name of Kamiku, missed a step and his hoof struck awkwardly. He recovered and continued.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 8
Focus. It was all about focus. It was how one harnessed the elements and wrung from them obedience;
it was how his people survived in a land that was harsh and unforgiving.
 Sweat dampened and darkened his fur as he danced. His large brown eyes were closed in
concentration, his hooves again finding their powerful rhythm. He tossed his head, short horns
stabbing the air, tail twitching. Others danced beside him. Their body heat and that of the fire, burning
brightly despite the flakes and wind drifting down from the smoke hole in the roof, kept the lodge
warm and comfortable.
 They all knew what was transpiring outside. They could not control these winds and snow, as they
could ordinary such things. No, this was his doing. But they could dance and feast and laugh in
defiance of the onslaught. They were taunka; they would endure.

 The world was blue and white and raging outside, but inside the Great Hall the air was warm and
still. A fireplace tall enough for a man to stand in was filled with thick logs, the crackling of their
burning the only noise. Over the ornately decorated mantel, carved with images of fantastical creatures,
the giant antler of a shoveltusk was mounted. Carved dragon heads served as sconces, holding torches
with flames burning bright. Heavy beams supported the feast hall that could have housed dozens, the
warm orange hue of the fires chasing away the shadows to hide on the corners. The cold stone of the
floor was softened and warmed by thick pelts of polar bears, shoveltusk, and other creatures.
 A table, long and heavy and carved, occupied most of the space in the room. It could have hosted
three dozen easily. Only three figures sat at the table now: a man, an orc, and a boy.
 None of it was real, of course. The man who sat at the place of honor at the table, slightly elevated
before the other two in a mammoth carved chair that was not quite a throne, understood this. He was
dreaming; he had been dreaming for a long, long time. The hall, the shoveltusk trophies, the fire, the
table—the orc and the boy—all were simply a part of his dreaming.
 The orc, on his left, was elderly, but still powerful. The orange fire- and torchlight flickered off the
ghastly image he bore on his heavy- jawed face—that of a skull, painted on. He had been a shaman, able
to direct and wield vast powers, and even now, even just as a figment of the man’s imagination, he was
intimidating.
 The boy was not. Once, he might have been a handsome child, with wide sea- green eyes, fair
features, and golden hair. But once was not now.
 The boy was sick.
 He was thin, so emaciated that his bones seemed to threaten to slice through the skin. The oncebright eyes were dimmed and sunken, a thin film covering them. Pustules marked his skin, bursting
and oozing forth a green fluid. Breathing seemed difficult and the child’s chest hitched in little panting
gasps. The man thought he could almost see the labored thumping of a heart that should have faltered
long ago, but persisted in continuing to beat.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 9
 “He is still here,” the orc said, stabbing a finger in the boy’s direction.
 “He will not last,” the man said.
 As if to confirm the words, the boy began to cough. Blood and mucus spattered the table in front of
him, and he wiped a thin arm clad in rotting finery across his pale mouth. He drew breath to speak in a
halting voice, the effort obviously taxing him.
 “You have not—yet won him. And I will—prove it to you.”
 “You are as foolish as you are stubborn,” the orc growled. “That battle was won long ago.”
 The man’s hands tightened on the arms of his chair as he listened to both of them. This had been a
recurring dream over the last few years; he found it now more tiresome than entertaining. “I grow
weary of the struggle. Let us end this once and for all.”
 The orc leered at the boy, his skull- face grinning hideously. The boy coughed again, but did not
quail from the orc’s regard. Slowly, with dignity, he straightened, his milky eyes darting from the orc to
the man.
 “Yes,” the orc said, “this serves nothing. Soon it will be time to awaken. Awaken, and move forward
into this world once more.” He turned to the man, his eyes gleaming. “Walk again the path you have
taken.”
 The skull seemed to detach itself from his face, hovering above it like another entity, and the room
changed with its movement. The carved sconces that a moment before were simple wooden dragons
undulated and rippled, coming to life, the torches in their mouths flaring and casting grotesque
dancing shadows as they shook their heads. The wind screamed outside and the door to the hall
slammed open. Snow whirled about the three figures. The man spread his arms and let the freezing
wind wrap about him like a cloak. The orc laughed, the skull floating over his face issuing its own
manic peals of mirth.
 “Let me show you that your destiny lies with me, and you can only know true power through
eliminating him.”
 The boy, fragile and slight, had been knocked out of his chair by the violent gusts of frigid air. Now
he propped himself up with an effort, shaking, his breaths coming in small puffs as he struggled to
climb back into his chair. He threw the man a look—of hope, fear, and odd determination.
 “All is not lost,” he whispered, and somehow, despite the orc and the skull’s laughter, despite the
shrieking of the wind, the man heard him.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 10
 World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King


 PART ONE
 THE GOLDEN BOY
 World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 CHAPTER ONE
 “Hold her head; that’s it, lad!”
 The mare, her normally white coat gray with sweat, rolled her eyes and whickered. Prince Arthas
Menethil, only son to King Terenas Menethil II, one day to rule the kingdom of Lordaeron, held fast
to the bridle and murmured soothingly.
 The horse jerked her head violently and almost took the nine- year- old with her. “Whoa,
Brightmane,” Arthas said. “Easy, girl, it’ll be all right. Nothing to worry about.”
 Jorum Balnir grunted in amusement. “doubt you’d feel that way if something the size of this foal was
coming out of you, lad.”
 His son Jarim, crouching beside his father and the prince, laughed and so did Arthas, giggling
uncontrollably even as hot and soggy foam from Brightmane’s champing mouth dropped onto his leg.
 “One more push, girl,” Balnir said, moving slowly along the horse’s body to where the foal, encased
in a shiny shroudlike membrane, was halfway through its journey into the world.
 Arthas wasn’t really supposed to be here. But when he had no lessons, he often sneaked away to the
Balnir farmstead to admire the horses Balnir was known for breeding and to play with his friend Jarim.
Both youths were well aware that a horsebreeder’s son, even one whose animals were regularly bought
as mounts for the royal household, was not a “proper” companion for a prince. Neither cared much, and
thus far none of the adults had put a halt to the friendship. And so it was that he had been here,
building forts, throwing snowballs, and playing Guards and Bandits with Jarim, when Jorum had
called to the boys to come watch the miracle of birth.
 The “miracle of birth” was actually pretty disgusting, Arthas thought. He hadn’t realized there’d be
so much…goo involved. Brightmane grunted and heaved again, her legs held stiff and straight out, and
with a sloshy wet sound her baby entered the world.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 11
 Her heavy head thumped down into Arthas’s lap, and she closed her eyes for a moment. Her sides
heaved as she caught her breath. The boy smiled, stroking the damp neck and thick, rough mane, and
looked over to where Jarim and his father were attending to the foal. It was chilly in the stables at this
time of year, and steam rose faintly from its warm, wet body. With a towel and dry hay, father and son
rubbed off the last of the foal’s unsettling shroudlike covering, and Arthas felt his face stretching in a
grin.
 Damp, gray, all long tangled legs and big eyes, the foal looked around, blinking in the dim lantern
light. Those large brown eyes locked with Arthas’s. You’re beautiful, Arthas thought, his breath
stopping for a moment, and realized that the much touted “miracle of birth” really was pretty
miraculous.
 Brightmane began to struggle to her feet. Arthas leaped to his own and pressed back against the
wooden walls of the stable so the great animal could turn around without crushing him. Mother and
newborn sniffed each other, then Brightmane grunted and began to bathe her son with her long
tongue.
 “Eh, lad, you’re a bit worse for wear,” said Jorum.
 Arthas looked down at himself and his heart sank. He was covered in straw and horse spittle.
Arthas shrugged. “Maybe I should jump into a snowbank on my way back to the palace,” he offered,
grinning. Sobering slightly, he said, “Don’t worry. I’m nine years old now. I’m no longer a baby. I can
go where I—”
 There was a squawking of chickens and the sound of a man’s booming voice, and Arthas’s face fell.
He squared his small shoulders, made an intense but ultimately ineffectual attempt at brushing off the
straw, and strode out of the barn.
 “Sir Uther,” he said in his best I am the prince and you had best remember it voice. “These people
have been kind to me. I pray you, don’t go trampling their poultry.”
 Or their snapdragon beds, he thought, glancing over at the snow- covered piles of raised earth
where the beautiful blooming flowers that were Vara Balnir’s pride and joy would burst forth in a few
short months. He heard Jorum and Jarim follow him out from the barn, but did not glance behind him,
instead regarding the mounted knight, fully clad in—
 “Armor!” Arthas gasped. “What’s happened?”
 “I’ll explain on the way,” Uther said grimly. “I’ll send someone back for your horse, Prince Arthas.
Steadfast can travel faster even with two.” He reached down, a large hand closing on Arthas’s arm, and
swung the boy up in front of him as if he weighed nothing at all. Vara had come out of the house at the
sound of a horse approaching at full gallop. She was wiping her hands off on a towel, and had a
smudge of flour on her nose. Her blue eyes were wide, and she looked over at her husband worriedly.
Uther nodded politely to her.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 12
 “We’ll discuss this later,” Uther said. “Ma’am.” He touched his forehead with a mailed hand in
courteous salute, then kicked his horse Steadfast—armored as his rider was—and the beast leaped into
action.
 Uther’s arm was like a band of steel around Arthas’s midsection. Fear bubbled up inside the boy but
he pushed it down even as he pushed on Uther’s arm. “I know how to ride,” he said, his petulance
covering up his worry. “Tell me what is going on.”
 “A rider from Southshore has come and gone. He brings ill news. A few days ago, hundreds of small
boats filled with refugees from Stormwind landed on our shores,” Uther said. He did not remove his
arm. Arthas gave up that particular struggle and craned his neck, listening intently, his sea- green eyes
wide and fastened on Uther’s grim face. “Stormwind has fallen.”
 “What? Stormwind? How? To who? What—”
 “We’ll find all that out shortly. The survivors, including Prince Varian, are being led by Stormwind’s
onetime Champion, Lord Anduin Lothar. He, Prince Varian, and others will be coming to Capital
City in a few days. Lothar has warned us he bears alarming news—obvious enough if something has
destroyed Stormwind. I was sent to find you and bring you back. You’ve no business playing with the
common folk at this moment.”
 Stunned, Arthas turned and faced forward again, his hands gripping Steadfast’s mane. Stormwind!
He had never been there, but had heard tales about it. It was a mighty place, with great stone walls and
beautiful buildings. It had been built with sturdiness in mind, to withstand the buffeting of the fierce
winds from which it had taken its name. To think that it had fallen—who or what could be strong
enough to take such a city?
 “How many people came with them?” he asked, pitching his voice louder than he really wished to in
order to be heard over the drumming of the horse’s hooves as they headed back toward the city.
 “Unknown. Not a small number, that much is certain. The messenger said it was everyone who had
survived.”
 Survived what?
 “And Prince Varian?” He’d heard of Varian all his life, of course, just as he knew all the names of the
neighboring kings, queens, princes, and princesses. Suddenly his eyes widened. Uther had mentioned
Varian—but not the prince’s father, King Llane—
 “Will soon become King Varian. King Llane fell with Stormwind.”
 This news of a single tragedy hit Arthas harder somehow than the thought of thousands of people
suddenly rendered homeless. Arthas’s own family was close- knit—he, his sister, Calia, his mother,
Queen Lianne, and of course King Terenas. He’d seen how some rulers behaved with their families,
and knew that his was remarkable in the degree of closeness. To have lost your city, your way of life,
and your father—
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 13
 “Poor Varian,” he said, quick tears of sympathy coming to his eyes.
 Uther patted his shoulder awkwardly. “Aye,” he said. “It is a dark day for the boy.”
 Arthas shivered suddenly, and not from the cold of a bright winter’s day. The beautiful afternoon,
with its blue sky and softly curving snow- draped landscape, had suddenly darkened for him.

 A few days later, Arthas was standing up on the castle’s ramparts, keeping Falric, one of the guards,
company and handing him a steaming hot mug of tea. Such a visit, like the ones Arthas paid to the
Balnir family and the castle’s scullery maids and valets and blacksmiths and indeed nearly every
underling on the royal grounds, was not unusual. Terenas always sighed, but Arthas knew that no one
was ever punished for speaking with him, and indeed he sometimes wondered if his father secretly
approved.
 Falric smiled gratefully and bowed deeply in genuine respect, pulling off his gauntlets so the mug
would warm his cold hands. Snow threatened, and the sky was a pale gray, but thus far the weather
was clear. Arthas leaned against the wall, resting his chin on his folded arms. He looked out over the
rolling white hills of Tirisfal, down the road that led through Silverpine Forest to Southshore. The
road along which Anduin Lothar, the mage Khadgar, and Prince Varian would be traveling.
 “Any sign of them?”
 “Nay, Your Highness,” Falric answered, sipping the hot beverage. “It could be today, tomorrow, or
the day after. If you’re hoping to catch a glimpse, sir, you may be waiting awhile.”
 Arthas shot him a grin, his eyes crinkling with mirth. “Better than lessons,” he said.
 “Well, sir, you’d know that better than I would,” Falric said diplomatically, clearly fighting the
impulse to grin back.
 While the guard finished the tea, Arthas sighed and looked back down the road as he had a dozen
times before. This had been exciting at first, but now he was becoming bored. He wanted to go back
and find out how Brightmane’s foal was, and began wondering how difficult it would be to slip away
for a few hours and not be missed. Falric was right. Lothar and Varian might still be a few days away if
—
 Arthas blinked. He slowly lifted his chin from his hands and narrowed his eyes.
 “They’re coming!” he cried, pointing.
 Falric was at his side immediately, the mug forgotten. He nodded.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 14
 “Sharp eyes, Prince Arthas! Marwyn!” he called. Another soldier snapped to attention. “Go tell the
king that Lothar and Varian are on their way. They should be here within the hour.”
 “Aye, captain,” the younger man said, saluting.
 “I’ll do it! I’ll go!” said Arthas, already moving as he spoke. Marwyn hesitated, glancing back at his
superior officer, but Arthas was determined to beat him. He raced down the steps, slipping on the ice
and having to jump the rest of the way, and ran through the courtyard, skidding to a halt as he
approached the throne room and barely remembering to compose himself. Today was when Terenas
met with representatives of the populace, to listen to their concerns and do what he could to assist
them.
 Arthas flipped back the hood of his beautifully embroidered red runecloth cape. He took a deep
breath, letting it escape his lips as soft mist, and nodded as he approached the two guards, who saluted
sharply and turned to push open the doors for him.
 The throne room was significantly warmer than the outside courtyard, even though it was a large
chamber formed of marble and stone with a high domed ceiling. Even on overcast days such as this
one, the octagonal window at the apex of the dome let in plenty of natural light. Torches in their
sconces burned steadily on the walls, adding both warmth and an orange tint to the room. An intricate
design of circles enclosing the seal of Lordaeron graced the floor, hidden now by the gathering of
people respectfully awaiting their turn to address their liege.
 Seated in the jeweled throne on a tiered dais was King Terenas II. His fair hair was touched with
gray only at the temples, and his face was slightly lined, with more smile lines than the creased frowns
that etched their marks on souls as well as visages. He wore a beautifully tailored robe in hues of blue
and purple, wrought with gleaming gold embroidery that caught the torchlight and glinted off his
crown. Terenas leaned forward slightly, engrossed in what the man who stood before him—a lesser
noble whose name Arthas couldn’t recall at the moment—was saying. His eyes, blue- green and intent,
were focused on the man.
 For a moment, knowing whose coming he was about to announce, Arthas simply stood looking at
his father. He, like Varian, was the son of a king, a prince of the blood. But Varian had no father, not
anymore, and Arthas felt a lump rise in his throat at the thought of seeing that throne empty, of hearing
the ancient song of coronation sung for him.
 By the Light, please let that day be a long, long time away.
 Perhaps feeling the intensity of his son’s gaze, Terenas glanced over at the door. His eyes crinkled in
a smile for a moment, then he returned his attention to the petitioner.
 Arthas cleared his throat and stepped forward. “Pardon the interruption. Father, they’re coming. I
saw them! They should be here within the hour.”
 Terenas sobered slightly. He knew who “they” were. He nodded. “Thank you, my son.”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 15
 Those assembled looked at one another; most of them, too, knew who “they” were and they moved
as if to end the meeting. Terenas held up a hand. “Nay. The weather holds and the road is clear. They
will arrive when they do, and not a moment before. Until then, let us continue.” He smiled ruefully. “I
have a feeling that once they come, audiences such as this will need to be tabled. Let us finish as much
business as we can before that moment.”
 Arthas looked at his father with pride. This was why people loved Terenas so much—and why the
king usually turned a blind eye to his son’s “adventuring” among the common folk. Terenas cared
deeply about the people he ruled, and had instilled that sentiment in his son.
 “Shall I ride out to meet them, Father?”
 Terenas scrutinized his son for a moment, then shook his fair head. “No. I think it best if you do not
attend this meeting.”
 Arthas felt like he’d been struck. Not attend? He was nine years old! Something very bad had
happened to an important ally, and a boy not much older than he had been rendered fatherless by it.
He felt a sudden flash of anger. Why did his father insist on sheltering him so? Why was he not allowed
to attend important meetings?
 He bit back the retort that would have sprung to his lips had he been alone with Terenas. It would
not do to argue with his father here, in front of all these people. Even if he was totally and completely in
the right on this. He took a deep breath, bowed, and left.
 An hour later, Arthas Menethil was safely ensconced in one of the many balconies that overlooked
the throne room. He grinned to himself; he was still small enough to hide under the seats if anyone
poked their nose in for a quick perusal. He fidgeted slightly; another year or two and he wouldn’t be
able to do this.
 But in a year or two, surely Father will understand that I deserve to be present at such events, and I
won’t have to hide.
 The thought pleased him. He rolled up his cloak and used it as a pillow while he waited. The room
was warm from braziers, torches, and the heat of many bodies in a small space. The heat and the
soothing murmur of voices in normal discussion lulled him, and he almost fell asleep.
 “Your Majesty.”
 The voice, powerful, resonant, and strong, jerked Arthas awake.
 “I am Anduin Lothar, a knight of Stormwind.”
 They were here! Lord Anduin Lothar, the onetime Champion of Stormwind…Arthas edged out
from under the seat and rose carefully, making sure he was hidden behind the blue curtain that draped
the box, and peeked out.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 16
 Lothar looked every inch the warrior, Arthas thought as he regarded the man. Tall, powerfully
built, he wore heavy armor with an ease that indicated he was well accustomed to its weight. Although
his upper lip and jaw sported a thick mustache and short beard, his head was almost bald; what hair he
had left had been tied back in a small ponytail. Beside him stood an old man in violet robes.
 Arthas’s gaze fell on the boy who could only be Prince Varian Wrynn. Tall, slender yet but with
broad shoulders that promised the slim frame would one day fill out, he looked pale and exhausted.
Arthas winced as he regarded the youth, a few years older than he, looking lost, alone, and frightened.
When addressed, Varian recovered and gave the polite requisite replies. Terenas was an old hand at
knowing how to make people feel comfortable. Quickly he dismissed all but a few courtiers and guards
and rose from his throne to greet the visitors.
 “Please, be seated,” he said, choosing not to sit in the glorious throne as was his right but instead
perching on the top stair of the dais. He drew Varian down beside him in a fatherly gesture. Arthas
smiled.
 Hidden away, the young prince of Lordaeron watched and listened closely, and the voices that
floated up to him spoke words that sounded almost fanciful. Yet as he regarded this mighty warrior of
Stormwind—and even more, as he studied the wan visage of the future king of such a magnificent
realm—Arthas realized with a creeping feeling that none of this was fantasy; all of it was deathly real,
and it was terrifying.
 The men gathered spoke of creatures called “orcs” that had somehow infested Azeroth. Huge,
green, with tusks for teeth and lusting for blood, they had formed a “horde” that flowed like a seemingly
unstoppable tide—“Enough to cover the land from shore to shore,” Lothar said direly. It was these
monsters that had attacked Stormwind and made refugees—or corpses, Arthas realized—of its
denizens. Things got heated when some courtier or other clearly didn’t believe Lothar. Lothar’s
temper rose, but Terenas defused the situation and brought the meeting to a close. “I will summon my
neighboring kings,” he said. “These events concern us all. Your Majesty, I offer you my home and my
protection for as long as you shall need it.”
 Arthas smiled. Varian was going to stay here, in the palace, with him. It would be nice to have
another noble boy to play with. He got along well enough with Calia, who was two years his elder, but,
well, she was a girl, and while he was fond of Jarim, he knew that their opportunities to play together
were perforce limited. Varian, however, was a prince of the blood, just like Arthas, and they could spar
together, and ride, and go exploring—
 “You’re telling us to prepare for war.” His father’s voice cut in on his thoughts with brutal efficiency,
and Arthas’s mood grew somber again.
 “Yes,” Lothar replied. “A war for the very survival of our race.”
 Arthas swallowed hard, then left the viewing box as silently as he had come.

World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 17
 As Arthas had expected, a short time later Prince Varian was shown into the guest quarters.
Terenas himself accompanied the boy, resting a hand gently on the youth’s shoulder. If he was
surprised to see his son waiting in the guest quarters, he did not show it.
 “Arthas. This is Prince Varian Wrynn, future king of Stormwind.”
 Arthas bowed to his equal. “Your Highness,” he said formally, “I bid you welcome to Lordaeron. I
only wish the circumstances were happier.”
 Varian returned the bow gracefully. “As I told King Terenas, I am grateful for your support and
friendship during these difficult times.”
 His voice was stiff, strained, weary. Arthas took in the cape, tunic, and breeches, made of runecloth
and mageweave and beautifully embroidered. It looked as though Varian had been wearing them for
half his life, so dirty were they. His face had clearly been scrubbed, but there were traces of dirt at his
temples and beneath his nails.
 “I will send up some servants shortly with some food and towels, hot water and a tub, so that you
may refresh yourself, Prince Varian.” Terenas continued to use the boy’s title; that would wear off with
time, but Arthas understood why the king emphasized it now. Varian needed to keep hearing that he
was still respected, still royal, when he had lost absolutely everything but his life. Varian pressed his lips
together and nodded.
 “Thank you,” he managed.
 “Arthas, I leave him in your care.” Terenas squeezed Varian’s shoulder reassuringly, then departed,
closing the door.
 The two boys stared at each other. Arthas’s mind was a total blank. The silence stretched
uncomfortably. Finally Arthas blurted, “I’m sorry about your father.”
 Varian winced and turned away, walking toward the huge windows that overlooked Lordamere
Lake. The snow that had been threatening all morning was finally coming, drifting softly downward to
cover the land with a silent blanket. It was too bad—on a clear day, you could see all the way to Fenris
Keep. “Thank you.”
 “I’m sure he died fighting nobly and gave as good as he got.”
 “He was assassinated.” Varian’s voice was blunt and emotionless. Arthas whirled to look at him,
shocked. His features, in profile to Arthas now and lit by the cold light of a winter’s day, were
unnaturally composed. Only his eyes, bloodshot and brown and filled with pain, seemed alive. “A
trusted friend managed to get him to speak with her alone. Then she killed him. Stabbed him right in
the heart.”
 Arthas stared. Death in glorious battle was difficult enough to handle, but this—
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 18
 Impulsively he placed a hand on the other prince’s arm. “I saw a foal being born yesterday,” he said.
It sounded inane, but it was the first thing that sprang to his mind and he spoke earnestly. “When the
weather lets up, I’ll take you to see him. He’s the most amazing thing.”
 Varian turned toward him and gazed at him for a long moment. Emotions flitted across his face—
offense, disbelief, gratitude, yearning, understanding. Suddenly the brown eyes filled with tears and
Varian looked away. He folded his arms and hunched in on himself, his shoulders shaking with sobs he
did his best to muffle. They came out anyway, harsh, racking sounds of mourning for a father, a
kingdom, a way of life that he probably hadn’t been able to grieve until this precise minute. Arthas
squeezed his arm and felt it rigid as stone beneath his fingers.
 “I hate winter,” Varian sobbed, and the depth of the hurt conveyed by those three simple words, a
seeming non sequitor, humbled Arthas. Unable to watch such raw pain, yet powerless to do anything
about it, he dropped his hand, turned away, and stared out the window.
 Outside, the snow continued to fall.
 World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 CHAPTER TWO
 Arthas was frustrated.
 He thought when word had come about the orcs that he’d finally begin serious training, perhaps
alongside his new best friend, Varian. Instead, exactly the opposite happened. The war against the
Horde resulted in everyone who could swing a sword joining the armed forces, right down to the
master blacksmith. Varian took pity on his younger counterpart and did what he could for a while, until
at last he sighed and looked sympathetically at Arthas.
 “Arthas, I don’t want to sound mean, but…”
 “But I’m terrible.”
 Varian grimaced. The two were in the armory hall, sparring with helms, leather chest pieces, and
wooden training swords. Varian went to the rack and hung up the training sword, removing his helm
as he spoke. “I’m just surprised, because you’re athletic and fast.”
 Arthas sulked; he knew Varian well enough to know that the older prince was trying to soften the
blow. He followed sullenly, hanging up his own sword and unfastening his protective gear.
 “In Stormwind, we start training when we’re quite young. By the time I was your age I had my own
set of armor specifically designed for me.”
 “Don’t rub it in,” Arthas grumbled.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 19
 “Sorry.” Varian grinned at him, and Arthas reluctantly gave a small smile back. Although their first
meeting had been laced with grief and awkwardness, Arthas had discovered that Varian had a strong
spirit and a generally optimistic outlook. “I just wonder why your father didn’t do the same for you.”
 Arthas knew. “He’s trying to protect me.”
 Varian sobered as he hung up his leather chest piece. “My father tried to protect me, too. Didn’t
work. The realities of life have a way of intruding.” He looked at Arthas. “I’m trained to fight. I’m not
trained to teach fighting. I might hurt you.”
 Arthas flushed. No suggestion that Arthas might hurt him. Varian seemed to see that he was only
digging himself deeper into a hole with the younger boy and clapped him on the shoulder. “Tell you
what. When the war’s over, and a proper trainer can be spared again, I’ll come with you to talk to King
Terenas. I’m sure you’ll be handing me my rear in no time.”

 The war eventually did end, and the Alliance was triumphant. The leader of the Horde, the oncemighty Orgrim Doomhammer, had been brought back to Capital City in chains. It had made a big
impression on both Arthas and Varian, to see the powerful orc paraded through Lordaeron. Turalyon,
the young paladin lieutenant who had defeated Doomhammer after the orc had slain the noble Anduin
Lothar, had shown mercy in choosing to spare the beast; Terenas, who was at heart a kindly man,
continued in that fashion by forbidding attacks on the creature. Jeers, boos, yes—seeing the orc who
had terrorized them for so long now powerless, an object of scorn and derision, heartened morale. But
Orgrim Doomhammer would not be harmed while in his care.
 It was the only time Arthas had seen Varian’s face ugly with hate, and he supposed he could not
blame the other boy. If orcs had murdered Terenas and Uther, he supposed he’d want to spit on the
ugly green things, too. “He should be killed,” Varian growled, his eyes angry as they watched from the
parapets as Doomhammer was marched toward the palace. “And I wish I could be the one to do it.”
 “He’s going to the Undercity,” said Arthas. The ancient royal crypts, dungeons, sewers, and twining
alleys deep below the palace had somehow gotten that nickname, as if the place was simply another
destination. Dark, dank, filthy, the Undercity was intended only for prisoners or the dead, but the
poorest of the poor in the land somehow always seemed to find their way in. If one was homeless, it
was better than freezing in the elements, and if one needed something…not entirely legal, even Arthas
understood that that was where you went to get it. Now and then the guards would go down and
make a sweep of the place in a desperate and ultimately futile attempt to clean it out.
 “No one ever gets out from the Undercity,” Arthas reassured his friend. “He’ll die in captivity.”
 “Too good for him,” Varian said. “Turalyon should have killed him when he had the chance.”
 Varian’s words were prophetic. The great orcish leader had only appeared to be humbled by the
scorn and hatred heaped upon him. It turned out he was far from broken. Lured by his dispiritedness,
or so Arthas gleaned by eavesdropping, the guards had grown lax in their care of him. No one was
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 20
quite sure how Orgrim Doomhammer’s escape had been engineered, because no one survived to
report on it—every guard he encountered had gotten his neck broken. But there was a trail of bodies,
that of guards, indigents, and criminals—Doomhammer did not discriminate—leading from the wideopen cell through the Undercity to the single escape route—the foul- smelling sewers. Doomhammer
was captured again shortly thereafter, and this time placed in the internment camps. When he escaped
from there, too, the Alliance collectively held its breath, waiting for a renewed attack. None came.
Either Doomhammer was finally dead, or they had shattered his fighting spirit after all.
 Two years had come and gone, and now it looked like the Dark Portal through which the Horde
had entered Azeroth the first time—the portal that the Alliance had shut down at the end of the
Second War—was going to be reopened. Or had already been reopened, Arthas wasn’t sure which,
because nobody apparently seemed to want to bother to tell him anything. Even though he was going
to become king one day.
 It was a beautiful day, sunny and clear and warm. Part of him wanted to be outside with his new
horse, whom he had named Invincible—the same foal he had seen being born on that bitter winter day
two years ago. Maybe he’d do that later. But for now, his footsteps took him to the armory, where he
and Varian had sparred and Varian had embarrassed him. The slight was unintended, to be sure, but it
stung all the same.
 Two years.
 Arthas walked over to the rack of wooden training swords and took one down. At eleven, he had
had what his governess called a “growth spurt”—at least she’d called it that the last time he had seen
her, when she wept and hugged him and declared him “a proper young man now” and no longer in
need of a governess. The little sword he had trained with at nine was a child’s sword. He was indeed a
proper young man, standing at five foot eight and likely to grow even taller if his heritage was any
indication. He hefted the sword, swinging it this way and that, and suddenly grinned.
 He advanced on one of the old suits of armor, gripping the sword firmly. “Hoy!” he called, wishing it
was one of the disgusting green monsters that had been such a thorn in his father’s side for so long. He
drew himself up to his full height, and lifted the tip of the sword to the suit of armor’s throat.
 “Think you to pass here, vile orc? You are in Alliance lands! I will show you mercy this once. Begone
and never return!”
 Ah, but orcs didn’t understand surrender, or honor. They were just brutes. So it would refuse to
kneel and show him respect.
 “What? You will not depart? I have given you a chance, but now, we fight!”
 And he lunged, as he had seen Varian do. Not directly at the armor, no, the thing was very old and
very valuable, but right beside it. Strike, block, duck in under the swing, bring the sword all the way
across the body, then whirl and—
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 21
 He gasped as the sword seemed to take on a life of its own and flew across the room. It landed
loudly on the marble floor, sliding along with a grating sound before slowly spinning to a stop.
 Dammit! He looked toward the door—and right into the face of Muradin Bronzebeard.
 Muradin was the dwarven ambassador to Lordaeron, brother to King Magni Bronzebeard and a
great favorite at court for his jovial, no- nonsense approach to everything from fine ale and pastries to
matters of state. He had a reputation as an excellent warrior as well, cunning and fierce in battle.
 And he had just watched the future king of Lordaeron pretend to fight orcs and throw his sword
clear across the room. Arthas felt his whole body break out in a sweat, and he knew his cheeks were
pink. He tried to recover.
 “Um…Ambassador…I was just…”
 The dwarf coughed and looked away. “I’m lookin’ fer yer father, boy. Can ye direct me? This infernal
place has too many turns.”
 Arthas mutely pointed to a stairway on his left. He watched the dwarf go. No other words were
exchanged.
 Arthas had never been more embarrassed in his life. Tears of shame burned in his eyes, and he
blinked them back hard. Without even bothering to put away the wooden sword, he fled the room.
 Ten minutes later, he was free, riding out of the stables and heading east into the hills of Tirisfal
Glades. He had two horses with him: a gentle, elderly dapple- gray gelding called Trueheart upon
which he was mounted and, on a training lead, the two- year- old colt Invincible.
 He’d felt the bond between them from the moment they had locked eyes, moments after the foal’s
birth. Arthas had known then that this would be his steed, his friend, the great horse with a great heart
who would be as much a part of him as—no, more than—his armor or weapons. Horses from good
stock such as this one could live twenty years or more if cared for well; this was the mount who would
bear Arthas elegantly in ceremony and faithfully on daily rides. He was not a warhorse. Such were a
breed apart, used only for specific purposes at specific times. He’d have one when he went into battle.
But Invincible would, and indeed already had, become part of his life.
 The stallion’s coat, mane, and tail, gray at his birth, had turned white as the snow that had coated
the ground on that day. It was a color that was rare even among the Balnir- bred horses, whose “white”
coats were really mostly just light gray. Arthas had toyed with names like “Snowfall” or “Starlight,” but
in the end, he followed the informal tradition of Lordaeron knights and gave his steed the name of a
quality. Uther’s mount was “Steadfast,” Terenas’s “Courageous.”
 His was “Invincible.”
 Arthas wanted desperately to ride Invincible, but the horsemaster warned that two years old was at
least a year too young. “Two’s a baby,” he’d said. “They’re still growing; their bones are still forming. Be
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 22
patient, Your Highness. Another year isn’t that long to wait for a horse that’ll serve you well for two
decades.”
 But it was a long time to wait. Too long. Arthas glanced back over his shoulder at the horse,
growing impatient with the plodding canter that seemed the most that Trueheart could summon. In
contrast with the elderly gelding, the two- year- old moved almost as if floating, with hardly any effort.
His ears were pricked forward, and his nostrils flared as he scented the smells of the glade. His eyes
were bright and he seemed to be saying, Come on, Arthas…. It’s what I was born for.
 Surely one ride couldn’t hurt. Just a little canter, and then back to the stables as if nothing had
happened.
 He slowed Trueheart to a walk and tied the reins to a low- slung tree branch. Invincible whickered
as Arthas walked up to him. The prince grinned at the velvety softness of the muzzle brushing his palm
as he fed the horse a piece of apple. Invincible was used to having a saddle; it was part of the slow and
patient breaking process, to get the horse accustomed to having something on its back. But an empty
saddle was much different from a live human being. Still, he’d spent a lot of time with the animal.
Arthas said a short prayer and then quickly, before Invincible could sidestep out of the way, vaulted
onto the horse’s back.
 Invincible reared, neighing furiously. Arthas wrapped his hands in the wiry mane and clung like a
burr with every inch of his long legs. The horse hopped and bucked, but Arthas held on. He yelped as
Invincible tried to scrape him off by running beneath one of the branches, but did not let go.
 And then Invincible was galloping.
 Or rather, he was flying. Or at least so it seemed to the giddy young prince, who crouched low on
the horse’s neck and grinned widely. He’d never been on an animal this fast before, and his heart
pounded with excitement. He didn’t even try to control Invincible; it was all he could do to simply
hang on. It was glorious, wild, beautiful, everything he’d dreamed of. They would—
 Before he even realized what had happened, Arthas was hurtling through the air to land hard on the
grassy earth. For a long moment he couldn’t breathe from the impact. Slowly he got to his feet. His
body ached, but nothing was broken.
 But Invincible was a rapidly disappearing dot in the distance. Arthas swore violently, kicking a
hillock and balling his fists. He was in for it now.

 Sir Uther the Lightbringer was waiting for him upon his return. Arthas grimaced as he slid off
Trueheart and handed the reins to a groomsman.
 “Invincible came back a short time ago by himself. He had a nasty cut on his leg, but I’m sure you’ll
be glad to know the horsemaster says he’ll be fine.”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 23
 Arthas debated lying, telling Uther they’d been spooked and Invincible had fled. But it was obvious
from the grass stains on his clothes that he’d fallen, and Uther would never believe that the prince
couldn’t stay on gentle old Trueheart, spooked or not.
 “You know you were not supposed to ride him yet,” Uther continued inexorably.
 Arthas sighed. “I know.”
 “Arthas, do you not understand? If you put too much pressure on him at this age he—”
 “I get it, all right? I could cripple him. It was just the one time.”
 “And that’s all it will be, isn’t it?”
 “Yes, sir,” Arthas said, sullenly.
 “You missed your lessons. Again.”
 Arthas was silent and did not look up at Uther. He was angry, embarrassed, and hurting, and
wanted nothing more than a hot bath and some briarthorn tea to ease the pain. His right knee was
starting to swell.
 “At least you are in time for the prayer session this afternoon.” Uther eyed him up and down.
“Though you’ll need to wash up.” Arthas was indeed sweaty and knew he smelled like horse. It was a
good smell, he thought. An honest one. “Hurry up. We’ll be assembling in the chapel.”
 Arthas wasn’t even sure what the prayer session was focusing on today. He felt vaguely bad about
that; the Light was important to both his father and Uther, and he knew that they badly wanted him to
be as devout as they were. But while he couldn’t argue with the evidence of his own eyes—the Light
was most definitely real; he’d seen priests and the new order of the paladins work true miracles with
healing and protection—he’d never felt called to sit and meditate for hours as Uther did, or make
frequent references in reverent tones as did his father. It was just…there.
 An hour later, scrubbed and changed into an outfit that was simple yet elegant, Arthas hurried to
the small family chapel in the royal wing.
 It was not a large room, but it was beautiful. It was a miniature version of the traditional chapel
style that could be seen in every human town, perhaps a trifle more lavish with regard to the details.
The chalice that was shared was finely wrought of gold and inlaid with gems; the table upon which it
lay, an antique. Even the benches had comfortable padding, while the common folk had to make do
with flat wooden ones.
 He realized as he entered quietly that he was the last—and winced as he recalled that several
important personages were visiting his father. In addition to the regular attendees—his family, Uther,
and Muradin—King Trollbane was present, though he looked even less happy than Arthas to be here.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 24
And…someone else. A girl, slender and straight with long blond hair, her back turned to him. Arthas
peered at her, curious, and bumped into one of the benches.
 He might as well have dropped a plate. Queen Lianne, still a beauty in her early fifties, turned at the
sound, smiling affectionately at her son. Her gown was perfectly arranged, her hair pulled back in a
golden coif from which no unruly tendril escaped. Calia, fourteen and looking as gawky and coltish as
Invincible had been at his birth, shot him a scowl. Evidently, word of his misdeeds had gotten out—or
else she was just angry with him at being late. Terenas nodded at him, then returned his eyes to the
bishop giving the service. Arthas cringed inwardly at the quiet disapproval in that gaze. Trollbane paid
him no mind, and Muradin, too, did not turn.
 Arthas slouched down onto one of the benches against the back wall. The bishop began to speak
and lifted his hands, limned with a soft, white radiance. Arthas wished the girl would turn a little so he
could catch a glimpse of her face. Who was she? Obviously the daughter of a noble or someone else of
high rank, else she would not be invited to attend private family services. He thought about who she
might be, more interested in discovering her identity than in the words of the service.
 “…and His Royal Highness, Arthas Menethil,” intoned the bishop. Arthas jerked to attention,
wondering if he’d missed something important. “May the Light’s blessing be upon him in every
thought, word, and deed, so that he may thrive beneath it and grow to serve it as its paladin.” Arthas
felt a sudden calming warmth flow through him as the blessing was laid upon him. The stiffness and
soreness vanished, leaving him refreshed and at peace. The bishop turned to the queen and the
princess. “May the Light shine on Her Royal Majesty, Lianne Menethil, that she—”
 Arthas grinned and waited for the bishop to complete the individual blessings. He’d name the girl
then. Arthas leaned against the back room of the wall.
 “And we humbly request the Light’s blessing on Lady Jaina Proudmoore. May she be blessed with
its healing and wisdom, that she—”
 Aha! The mystery girl was a mystery no longer. Jaina Proudmoore, a year younger than he,
daughter to Admiral Daelin Proudmoore, naval war hero and ruler of Kul Tiras. What did intrigue
him was why she was here and—
 “—and that her studies at Dalaran go well. We ask that she become a representative of the Light,
and that in the role of a mage, she will serve her people well and truly.”
 That made sense. She was on her way to Dalaran, the beautiful city of magi not too far from Capital
City. Knowing the rigid rules of etiquette and hospitality that were so pervasive in royal and noble
circles, she’d be here for a few days before traveling on.
 This, he thought, could be fun.
 At the end of the service, Arthas, already located near the door, stepped out first. Muradin and
Trollbane were the first out, both looking slightly relieved that the service was over. Terenas, Uther,
Lianne, Calia, and Jaina followed.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 25
 Both his sister and the Proudmoore girl were fair haired and slender. But the resemblance stopped
there. Calia was delicately boned, with a face right out of old paintings, pale skinned and soft. Jaina,
however, had bright eyes and a lively smile, and she moved like someone who was well accustomed to
riding and hiking. She obviously spent a great deal of time out of doors, as her face was tanned with a
smattering of sprinkles across her nose.
 This, Arthas decided, was a girl who would not mind getting a snowball in the face, or going for a
swim on a hot day. Someone, unlike his sister, he could play with.
 “Arthas—a word wi’ ye,” came a gruff voice. Arthas turned to see the ambassador peering up at him.
 “Of course, sir,” Arthas said, his heart sinking. All he wanted to do was talk to this new friend—he
was already sure they would get along famously—and Muradin probably wanted to scold him again for
the embarrassing display earlier in the armory. At least the dwarf was discreet enough to walk a few
paces away.
 He turned to face the prince, stubby thumbs hooked into his belt, gruff face knotted in thought.
“Lad,” he said, “I’ll get right tae th’ point. Yer fightin’ form is terrible.”
 Again, Arthas felt the blood rush to his face. “I know,” he said, “but Father—”
 “Yer father has many things on ’is mind. Dinna ye be saying a thing against ’im.”
 Well, what was he supposed to say? “Well I can’t very well teach myself fighting. You saw what
happened when I tried.”
 “I ken tha’. I’ll teach ye if ye like.”
 “You—you will?” Arthas was at first disbelieving, then delighted. The dwarves were renowned for
their fighting prowess, among many things. Part of Arthas wondered if Muradin would also teach him
how to hold his ale, another thing dwarves were known for, but he decided not to ask that.
 “Aye, that’s what I said, wasn’t it? I’ve spoken wi’ yer father, an’ he’s all for it. Been put off long
enough as it is. But let’s get one thing straight. I’ll take nae excuses. And I’ll be pushin’ ye right hard.
And if at any moment I say tae mesel’, ‘Muradin, ye’re wastin’ yer time,’ I stop. D’ye agree, boy?”
 Arthas fought back an incongruous giggle at the thought of someone who stood so much shorter
than he calling him “boy,” but bit it back. “Yes, sir,” he said fervently. Muradin nodded and stuck out a
large, calloused hand. Arthas shook it. Grinning, he glanced up at his father, who was deep in
conversation with Uther. They turned as one to regard him, both pairs of eyes narrowing in
speculation, and inwardly Arthas sighed. He knew that look. So much for playing with Jaina—he’d
probably not have time to even see her again before she left.
 He turned to watch as Calia, her arm around the younger girl’s shoulder, swept Jaina from the
room. But right before she disappeared through the doorway, Admiral Proudmoore’s daughter turned
her golden head, caught Arthas’s gaze with her own, and smiled.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 26
 World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 CHAPTER THREE
 “I’m very proud of you, Arthas,” said his father. “Stepping up to the responsibility like this.”
 In the week that Jaina Proudmoore had been with the Menethil family as an honored guest,
“responsibility” had been the watchword. Not only had his training with Muradin begun—and it was
every bit as rigorous and demanding as the dwarf had warned, the pain of sore muscles and bruises
augmented by the occasional ringing cuff on the ear when Arthas was not paying sufficient attention
for Muradin’s liking—but as Arthas had feared, Uther and Terenas also decided it was time that the
prince’s training was stepped up in other areas. Arthas would rise before dawn, grab a quick breakfast
of bread and cheese, and go on an early ride with Muradin. The ride would end in a hike, and it was
the twelve- year- old youth who always ended up shaking and winded. Arthas secretly wondered if the
dwarves had such an affinity with stones that the very earth made it easy for them to climb it. Back
home, bath, lessons in history, mathematics, and calligraphy. A midday meal, then it was all afternoon
in the chapel with Uther, praying, meditating, and discussing the nature of paladins and the rigorous
disciplines they must observe. dinner, and then Arthas stumbled into bed to sleep the deep dreamless
sleep of the utterly exhausted.
 He’d seen Jaina only a few times at dinner, and she and Calia seemed to be thick as thieves. Arthas
finally decided enough was enough, and, taking the lessons in history and politics that were being
drilled into his head, he approached his father and Uther with the offer to escort their guest, Lady
Jaina Proudmoore, to dalaran himself.
 He didn’t bother to tell them it was because he wanted to get out of his duties. It pleased Terenas to
think of his son as being so responsible, Jaina smiled brightly at the prospect, and it got Arthas exactly
what he wanted. Everyone was happy.
 And so it was that in early summer, when the flowers were blooming, the woods were full of game,
and the sun danced above them in a sky of bright blue, Prince Arthas Menethil was accompanying a
brightly smiling, blond, young lady on a journey to the wondrous city of magi.
 They’d gotten a little late of a start—one thing Arthas was starting to learn about Jaina Proudmoore
was that she was not exactly punctual—but Arthas didn’t mind. He was in no hurry. They weren’t
alone, of course. Propriety demanded that Jaina’s lady- in- waiting and a guard or two ride escort. But
still, the servants hung back and let the two young nobles become acquainted. They rode for a while,
then stopped for a picnic lunch. While they were munching on bread, cheese, and watered wine, one of
Arthas’s men came up to him.
 “Sir, with your permission, we will make preparations to spend the night in Ambermill. On the
morrow, we can push on the rest of the way to Dalaran. We should arrive there by nightfall.”
 Arthas shook his head. “No, let’s continue. We can camp overnight in the Hillsbrad area. That will
get Lady Jaina to Dalaran by mid- morning tomorrow.” He turned to smile at her.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 27
 She smiled back, though he caught a hint of disappointment in her eyes.
 “Are you sure, sir? We’ve planned on accepting the hospitality of the locals, not subjecting the lady
to sleeping out in the open.”
 “It’s fine, Kayvan,” Jaina spoke up. “I’m not a fragile little figurine.”
 Arthas’s smile widened into a grin.
 He hoped she’d feel that way in a few hours.

 While the servants set up camp, Arthas and Jaina went exploring. They scrambled up a hill that
gave them an unparalleled view. To the west, they could see the little farming community of Ambermill
and even the distant spires of Baron Silverlaine’s keep. To the east, they could almost make out
Dalaran itself, and more clearly, the internment camp to its south. Since the end of the Second War,
the orcs had been rounded up and placed into these camps. It was more merciful than simply
slaughtering them on sight, Terenas had explained to Arthas. And besides, the orcs seemed to be
suffering from a strange malaise. Most of the time when humans stumbled upon them, or hunted them,
they fought only halfheartedly and went into internment peacefully. There were several camps just like
this one.
 They had a rustic meal of roasted rabbit on a spit and retired shortly after dark. Once he was
assured that everyone was asleep, Arthas threw a tunic over his breeches and quickly tugged on his
boots. As an afterthought, he took one of his daggers and fastened it to his belt, then crept over to
Jaina.
 “Jaina,” he whispered, “wake up.”
 She awoke in silence and unafraid, her eyes glinting in the moonlight. He squatted back as she sat
up, putting a finger to his lips. She spoke in a whisper. “Arthas? Is something wrong?”
 He grinned. “You up for an adventure?”
 She tilted her head. “What sort of an adventure?”
 “Trust me.”
 Jaina looked at him for a moment, then nodded. “All right.”
 She, like all of them, had gone to sleep mostly dressed and simply needed to pull on her boots and
cloak. She rose, made a halfhearted attempt to comb her fingers through her blond hair, and nodded.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 28
 Jaina followed him as they ascended the same ridge they had explored earlier that day. The climb
was more challenging at night, but the moonlight was quite bright and their feet did not slip.
 “There’s our destination,” he said, pointing.
 Jaina gulped. “The internment camp?”
 “Have you ever seen one up close?”
 “No, and I don’t want to.”
 He frowned, disappointed. “Come on, Jaina. It’s our one chance to get a good look at an orc. Aren’t
you curious?”
 Her face was hard to read in the moonlight, her eyes dark pools of shadow. “I—they killed Derek.
My older brother.”
 “One of them killed Varian’s father, too. They’ve killed a lot of people, and that’s why they’re in these
camps. It’s the best place for them. A lot of people don’t like the fact that my father is raising taxes to
pay for the camps, but—come on and judge for yourself. I missed a chance to get a good look at
Doomhammer when he was in the Undercity. I don’t want to miss a chance to see one now.”
 She was silent, and at last he sighed. “All right, I’ll take you back.”
 “No,” she said, surprising him. “Let’s go.”
 Quietly they made their descent. “All right,” Arthas whispered. “When we were up here earlier, I
made note of their patrols. It doesn’t look like they’re much different at night, except maybe even more
infrequent. With the orcs not having much spirit left in them, I guess the guards think that the chances
of escape aren’t that likely.” He smiled at her reassuringly. “Which works out well for us. Other than
patrols, someone is always stationed in those two watchtowers. They’re the ones we have to be most
careful of, but hopefully they’ll be looking for any disturbance to come from the front rather than
behind, since the camp backs up against a sheer wall face. Now, let this fellow here complete his
circuit, and we should have ample time to get close to that wall right there and take a good look.”
 They waited for the bored- looking guard to meander past, then a few more breaths after that. “Put
your hood up,” Arthas said. Both had fair hair, and it would be far too easy for the guards to spot. Jaina
looked nervous but excited, and obeyed. Fortunately both she and Arthas wore cloaks of a dark shade.
“Ready?” She nodded. “Good. Let’s go!”
 They slipped quickly and quietly down the rest of the way. Arthas held her back for a moment until
the guard in the tower was looking in the other direction, then motioned to her. They ran forward,
making sure their hoods were securely in place, and a few steps later they were pressing against the
wall of the camp.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 29
 The camps were rough but efficient. They were made of wood, little more than logs fastened
together, sharpened at the top and embedded deep into the ground. There were plenty of chinks in the
“wall” that a curious boy and girl could look through.
 It was hard to see at first, but there were several large shapes inside. Arthas turned his head for a
better look. They were orcs all right. Some of them were on the ground, curled up and covered by
blankets. Some walked here and there, almost aimlessly, like animals in cages, but lacking a caged
beast’s almost palpable yearning for freedom. Over there was what looked like a family unit—a male, a
female, and a young one. The female, slighter and shorter than the male, held something small to her
chest, and Arthas realized it was an infant.
 “Oh,” whispered Jaina beside him. “They look…so sad.”
 Arthas snorted, then remembered the need to be quiet. He quickly glanced up at the tower, but the
guard had heard nothing. “Sad? Jaina, these brutes destroyed Stormwind. They wanted to render
humankind extinct. They killed your brother, for Light’s sake. Don’t waste any pity on them.”
 “Still—somehow I didn’t think they would have children,” Jaina continued. “Do you see the one with
the baby?”
 “Well of course they have children, even rats have children,” Arthas said. He was irritated, but then,
maybe he should have expected a reaction like that from an eleven- year- old girl.
 “They look harmless enough. Are you sure they belong here?” She turned her face to his, a white
oval in the moonlight, seeking his opinion. “It’s expensive to keep them here. Maybe they should be
released.”
 “Jaina,” he said, keeping his voice soft, “they’re killers. Even if right now they’re lethargic, who can
say what would happen if they’re released?”
 She sighed softly in the darkness and didn’t answer. Arthas shook his head. He’d seen enough—the
guard would be back shortly. “Ready to go back?”
 She nodded, stepping away and running quickly with him back toward the hill. Arthas glanced over
his shoulder and saw the guard start to turn. He dove toward Jaina, grabbed her around the waist, and
shoved her to the ground, hitting hard beside her. “Don’t move,” he said, “the guard is looking right at
us!”
 Despite the rough fall Jaina was smart enough to freeze at once. Carefully, keeping his face as
shadowed as possible, Arthas turned his head to look at the guard. He couldn’t see a face at this
distance, but the man’s posture bespoke boredom and weariness. After a long moment, during which
Arthas heard his heart thundering in his ears, the guard turned to face the other direction.
 “Sorry about that,” Arthas apologized, helping Jaina to her feet. “You all right?”
 “Yes,” Jaina said. She grinned at him.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 30
 They were back in their respective sleeping areas a few moments later. Arthas looked up at the
stars, completely satisfied.
 It had been a good day.

 Late that next morning, they arrived at Dalaran. Arthas had never been there before, though of
course had heard a great deal about it. The magi were a private and mysterious lot—quite powerful,
but they kept to themselves save when needed. Arthas remembered when Khadgar had accompanied
Anduin Lothar and Prince—now King—Varian Wrynn to speak with Terenas, to warn them of the
orcish threat. His presence had lent weight to Anduin’s statements, and with good reason. Magi of the
Kirin Tor didn’t get involved in ordinary politics.
 Nor did they do the ordinary political maneuvering such as inviting royalty to enjoy their hospitality.
It was only because Jaina was coming to study that Arthas and his retinue were permitted admittance.
Dalaran was beautiful, even more glorious than Capital City. It seemed almost impossibly clean and
bright, as a city based so deeply on magic ought to be. There were several graceful towers reaching
skyward, their bases white stone and their apexes violet encircled with gold. Many had radiant,
hovering stones dancing around them. Others had windows of stained glass that caught the sunlight.
Gardens bloomed, the fragrances from wild, fantastical flowers providing a scent so heady Arthas was
almost dizzy. Or maybe it was the constant thrum of magic in the air that caused the sensation.
 He felt very ordinary and dingy as they rode into the city, and almost wished they hadn’t slept
outside last night. If they had stayed at Ambermill, at least he’d have had a chance to have bathed. But
then, he and Jaina wouldn’t have gotten a chance to spy on the internment camp.
 He glanced at his companion. Her blue eyes were wide with awe and excitement, her lips slightly
parted. She turned to Arthas, those lips curving in a smile.
 “Aren’t I lucky to be studying here?”
 “Sure,” he said, smiling on her behalf. She was drinking this in like one who had been given water
after a week in the desert, but he felt…unwanted. He clearly did not have the affinity for wielding magic
as she did.
 “I’m told that outsiders aren’t usually welcome,” she said. “I think that’s a shame. It would be nice to
see you again.”
 She blushed, and for a moment, Arthas forgot about the intimidation the city emanated, and
heartily agreed that it would be nice to see Lady Jaina Proudmoore again, too.
 Very nice indeed.

World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 31
 “Again, ye little gnome girl! I’ll pull yer pigtails, ye—Ooof!”
 The shield caught the taunting dwarf full in the helmed face, and he actually stumbled back a step
or two. Arthas slashed with the sword, grinning beneath his own helm as it connected solidly. Then
suddenly, he was sailing through the air to land hard on his back. His vision was filled with the image
of a looming head with a long beard, and he was barely able to lift his blade in time to parry. With a
grunt, he pulled his legs in to his chest and then extended them hard, catching Muradin in the gut.
This time it was the dwarf who went hurtling backward. Arthas brought his legs down swiftly and
leaped up in a single smooth motion, charging his teacher who was still on the ground, coming at him
with blow after blow until Muradin spoke the words that Arthas honestly never thought he’d hear:
 “I yield!”
 It took everything Arthas had to halt the strike, pulling up and back so abruptly he lost his balance
and stumbled. Muradin lay where he was, his chest rising and falling.
 Fear squeezed Arthas’s heart. “Muradin? Muradin!”
 A hearty chuckle escaped from the thick, bronze beard. “Well done, lad, well done indeed!” He
struggled to sit up and Arthas was there, reaching out a hand to help haul the dwarf to his feet.
Muradin pumped the hand happily. “So, ye were payin’ attention after all when I taught ye my special
trick.”
 Relieved and pleased with the praise, Arthas grinned. Some of what Muradin taught him would be
repeated, honed, and reinforced in his paladin training. But other things—well, he didn’t think Uther
the Lightbringer would know about feet planted firmly in the belly, or the rather handy trick regarding
the efficacy of a broken wine bottle. There was fighting and there was fighting, and Muradin
Bronzebeard seemed determined that Arthas Menethil would understand all aspects of it.
 Arthas was fourteen now, and had been training with Muradin several times a week, save for when
the dwarf was away on diplomatic errands. At first, it had gone as both parties had expected—badly.
Arthas left the first dozen or so sessions bruised, bloodied, and limping. He had stubbornly refused any
offers of healing, insisting that the pain was part of the process. Muradin had approved, and he had
shown it by pressing Arthas all the harder. Arthas never complained, not even when he wanted to, not
even when Muradin scolded him or pressed the attack long after Arthas was too exhausted to even
hold up a shield.
 And for that stubborn refusal to whine or to quit, he was rewarded twofold: he learned and learned
well, and he won the respect of Muradin Bronzebeard.
 “Oh yes, sir, I was paying attention.” Arthas chuckled.
 “Good lad, good lad.” Muradin reached up to clap him on the shoulder. “Now, off wi’ ye. Ye’ve taken
quite the beating today; ye deserve a bit o’ rest.”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 32
 His eyes twinkled as he spoke and Arthas nodded as if agreeing. Today, it was Muradin who had
taken the beating. And he seemed as happy as Arthas at the fact. The prince’s heart suddenly swelled
with affection toward the dwarf. Though a strict taskmaster, Muradin was someone of whom Arthas
had grown terribly fond.
 He whistled a little as he strode toward his quarters, but then a sudden outburst froze him in his
tracks.
 “No, Father! I will not!”
 “Calia, I grow tired of this conversation. You have no say in this matter.”
 “Papa, please, no!”
 Arthas edged a little closer to Calia’s chambers. The door was ajar and he listened, slightly worried.
Terenas doted on Calia. What in the world was he asking of her to make her beg with him and use the
term of endearment that both she and Arthas had dropped as they grew toward adulthood?
 Calia sobbed brokenly. Arthas could take it no longer. He opened the door. “I’m sorry, I couldn’t
help but overhear, but—what is wrong?”
 Terenas had recently seemed to be acting strangely, and now he looked furious with his sixteenyear- old daughter. “It is no business of yours, Arthas,” Terenas rumbled. “I have told Calia something I
wish her to do. She will obey me.”
 Calia collapsed on the bed, sobbing. Arthas stared from his father to his sister in utter
astonishment. Terenas muttered something and stormed out. Arthas glanced back at Calia, then
followed his father.
 “Father, please, what’s going on?”
 “Do not question me. Calia’s duty is to obey her father.” Terenas marched through a door and into a
receiving room. Arthas recognized Lord Daval Prestor, a young noble whom Terenas seemed to hold
in very high regard, and a pair of visiting Dalaran wizards he did not know.
 “Run along back to your sister, Arthas, and try to calm her. I’ll be with you as soon as I can, I
promise.”
 With a final glance at the three visitors, Arthas nodded and went back to Calia’s rooms. His older
sister had not moved, although her sobs had quieted somewhat. At a total loss, Arthas simply sat
beside her on the bed, feeling awkward.
 Calia sat up on the bed, her face wet. “I’m sorry you h- had to see that, Arthas, but m- maybe it’s for
the best.”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 33
 “What did Father want you to do?”
 “He wishes me to marry against my will.”
 Arthas blinked. “Calie, you’re only sixteen, you’re not even old enough to get married.”
 She reached for a handkerchief and dabbed at her swollen eyes. “That’s what I said. But Father said
it didn’t matter; we’d formalize the betrothal and on my birthday I’d marry Lord Prestor.”
 Arthas’s sea- green eyes widened in comprehension. So that was why Prestor was here….
 “Well,” he began awkwardly, “he’s very well connected, and—I guess he’s handsome. Everyone says
so. At least he’s not some old man.”
 “You don’t understand, Arthas. I don’t care how well connected or handsome or even kind he is. It’s
that I don’t have any choice in the matter. I’m—I’m like your horse. I’m a thing, not a person. To be
given away as Father sees fit—to seal a political bargain.”
 “You—you don’t love Prestor?”
 “Love him?” Her blue, bloodshot eyes narrowed in anger. “I barely know him! He’s never taken the
slightest…oh, what’s the use? I know that this is common practice among royalty and nobility. That we
are pawns. But I just never expected Father—”
 Nor had Arthas. He’d honestly never given much thought to marriage for himself or his sister. He
was much more interested in training with Muradin and riding Invincible. But Calia was right. It was
common among the nobility to make good marriages to ensure their political status.
 He’d just never thought his father would sell his daughter like—like a broodmare.
 “Calie, I’m really sorry,” he said, and meant it. “Is there someone else? Maybe you could convince
Father that there’s a better match—one that makes you happy as well.”
 Calia shook her head bitterly. “It’s no use. You heard him. He didn’t ask me, didn’t suggest Lord
Prestor—he ordered me.” She looked at him pleadingly. “Arthas, when you are king, promise me—
promise me you won’t do that to your children.”
 Children? Arthas was in no way ready to think about that. There weren’t even any—well, there was,
but he hadn’t thought about her in—
 “And when you marry—Papa cannot order you as he orders me. Make sure you care for this girl and
—and that she cares for you. Or is at least asked about whom she wants to share her life and her b- bed
with.”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 34
 She started to weep afresh, but Arthas was too shaken by the revelation that burst upon him. He
was only fourteen now, but in four short years, he’d be of age to wed. He suddenly recalled snatches of
conversation he’d heard here and there about the future of the Menethil line. His wife would be the
mother of kings. He’d have to choose carefully, but also, as Calia had asked, kindly. His parents
obviously cared greatly for each other. It was reflected in their smiles and gestures, despite many years
of marriage. Arthas wanted that. He wanted a companion, a friend, a—
 He frowned. But what if he couldn’t have that? “I’m sorry, Calie, but maybe you’re the lucky one. It
might be worse to have the freedom to choose, and know that you couldn’t have what you wanted.”
 “I would trade that for being a—a piece of meat in a heartbeat.”
 “We each have our duties, I guess,” Arthas said quietly, somberly. “You to marry whomever Father
wants, and me to marry well for the kingdom.” He rose abruptly. “I’m sorry, Calie.”
 “Arthas—where are you going?”
 He didn’t answer, but practically raced through the palace to the stables and, without waiting for a
groom, quickly saddled Invincible himself. Arthas knew it was only a temporary solution, but he was
fourteen, and a temporary solution was still a solution.
 He bent low over Invincible’s back, the white mane whipping his face as the horse galloped, all
sleekly coiled muscle and grace. Arthas’s face stretched in a grin. He was never happier than when he
rode like this, the two of them merging into one glorious whole. He had waited, his patience sorely
tested, for so long to be able to ride the animal he had watched coming into the world, but it had been
worth it. They were the perfect team. Invincible wanted nothing from him, asked nothing of him, only
seemed to wish to be allowed to escape the confines of the stables as Arthas longed to escape the
confines of his royalty. They did so together.
 They were coming up on the jump Arthas loved now. To the east of Capital City and close to the
Balnir farmstead was a small cluster of hills. Invincible surged, the earth devoured by his pounding
hooves, pulling himself upward toward the precipice almost as fast as if they were on level ground. He
wheeled and turned along the narrow pathways, sending stones scattering with his hooves, his heart
and Arthas’s both racing in excitement. Then Arthas guided the stallion to the left, over an
embankment—a shortcut to the Balnir property. Invincible did not hesitate, had not hesitated even the
first time that Arthas had asked him to leap. He gathered himself and launched forward, and for a
glorious, heart- stopping moment, horse and rider were airborne. Then they landed securely on soft,
springy grass, and were off again.
 Invincible.
 World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 CHAPTER FOUR
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 35
 “As you can see, Your Highness,” said Lieutenant General Aedelas Blackmoore, “the taxes have
been put to good use. Every precaution has been taken in the operation of this facility. In fact, security
is so tight we’ve been able to stage gladiatorial combat here.”
 “So I’ve heard,” said Arthas, as he walked with the commander of the internment camps on a tour of
the grounds. Durnholde, not an internment camp itself, but the nerve center of all of the others, was
huge, and indeed had almost a festival air about it. It was a crisp but bright autumn day, and the breeze
caused the blue and white banners that flew over the keep to snap energetically. The wind stirred
Blackmoore’s long raven hair and tugged at Arthas’s cloak as they strolled along the ramparts.
 “And so you shall also see,” Blackmoore promised, giving his prince an ingratiating grin.
 It had been Arthas’s idea for a surprise inspection. Terenas had praised Arthas for his initiative and
compassion. “It’s only right, Father,” Arthas had said, and by and large he meant it, although his
primary reason for the suggestion was to satisfy his curiosity about the pet orc the lieutenant general
kept. “We should make sure the money is going into the camps and not Blackmoore’s pocket. We can
ascertain if he is taking proper care of the gladiatorial participants—and also, make sure he is not
walking the path of his father.”
 Blackmoore’s father, General Aedelyn Blackmoore, had been a notorious traitor, tried and
convicted of selling state secrets. While his crimes had taken place long ago, when his son had been but
a child, the stain had dogged Aedelas throughout his military career. It was only his record of victory in
battles, and particular ferocity in fighting the orcs, that had enabled the current Blackmoore to rise in
the ranks. Still, Arthas could detect the smell of liquor on the man’s breath, even at this hour of the
morning. He suspected that particular piece of information would not be news to Terenas, but he’d
make sure he told his father anyway.
 Arthas looked down, feigning interest in watching the dozens of guards who stood at rigid
attention. He wondered if they were that attentive when their future king wasn’t watching them.
 “I look forward to the bout today,” he said. “Will I be able to watch your Thrall in action? I’ve heard
quite a bit about him.”
 Blackmoore grinned, his neatly trimmed goatee parting to reveal white teeth. “He was not
scheduled to fight today, but for you, Your Highness, I shall pair him up against the worthiest foes
available.”
 Two hours later, the tour was complete, and Arthas shared a delicious meal with Blackmoore and a
younger man named Lord Karramyn Langston, whom Blackmoore introduced as “my protégé.”
Arthas took an instinctive dislike to Langston, noting the man’s soft hands and languid demeanor. At
least Blackmoore had fought in battle for his title; this boy—Arthas thought of him as a boy, although
in truth Langston was older than Arthas’s seventeen years—had been handed everything on a platter.
 Well, so have I, he thought, but he also knew what sacrifices a king would be expected to make.
Langston looked like he’d never denied himself a thing in his life. Nor did he deny himself now, helping
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 36
himself to the choicest cuts of meat, the most lavish pastries, and more than one glass of wine to wash it
down with. Blackmoore, in contrast, ate sparingly, though he had more alcohol than Langston.
 Arthas’s dislike of the pair was completed when their serving girl entered and Blackmoore reached
to touch her in a proprietary manner. The girl, golden- haired and simply clad, with a face that needed
no artifice to be beautiful, smiled as if she enjoyed it, but Arthas caught a quick flash of unhappiness in
her blue eyes.
 “This is Taretha Foxton,” Blackmoore said, one hand still caressing the girl’s arm as she gathered
the plates. “Daughter of my personal servant, Tammis, whom I’m sure you’ll see later.”
 Arthas gave the girl his most winning smile. She reminded him a bit of Jaina—her hair brightened
by the sun, her skin tanned. She returned the smile fleetingly, then demurely looked away as she
gathered the plates, dropping a quick curtsey before leaving.
 “You’ll have one like that soon enough, lad,” Blackmoore said, laughing. It took Arthas a second to
grasp the meaning and then he blinked, startled. The two men laughed harder, and Blackmoore raised
his goblet in a toast.
 “To fair- haired girls,” he said, in a purring voice. Arthas looked back at Taretha, thought of Jaina,
and forced himself to raise his glass.

 An hour later Arthas had forgotten all about Taretha Foxton and his indignation on her behalf. His
voice was raw from screaming, his hands hurt from clapping, and he was having the time of his life.
 At first, he’d felt a little uncomfortable. The first few combatants in the ring were simple beasts
pitted against one another, fighting to the death for no reason other than the enjoyment of the
onlookers. “How are they treated prior to this?” Arthas had asked. He was fond of animals; it unsettled
him to see them used so.
 Langston had opened his mouth, but Blackmoore shushed him with a quick gesture. He had
smiled, leaning back in his chaise lounge and snagging a bunch of grapes. “Well of course we want
them at their fighting peak,” he said. “So they are captured and treated quite well. And as you can see,
the bouts go quickly. If an animal survives and is not able to continue fighting again, we put him down
at once, mercifully.”
 Arthas hoped the man was not lying to him. A sick feeling in his gut told him Blackmoore probably
was, but he ignored it. The feeling vanished when the fighting involved men against the beasts. As he
watched, riveted, Blackmoore said, “The men are paid well. They in fact become minor celebrities.”
 Not the orc, though. And Arthas knew it, and approved. That’s what he was waiting for—the
chance to see Blackmoore’s pet orc, found as an infant and raised to be a fighter in these rings, in
combat.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 37
 He was not disappointed. Apparently, everything up until now had been a warm- up for the crowd.
When the doors creaked open and a huge green shape strode forward, everyone stood, roaring.
Somehow Arthas found himself among them.
 Thrall was enormous, appearing even larger because he was obviously so much healthier and alert
than the other specimens Arthas had seen in the camps. He wore little armor and no helm, and green
skin stretched tightly over powerful muscle. Too, he stood straighter than others. The cheering was
deafening, and Thrall walked a circle around the ring, lifting his fists, turning his ugly face up to be
showered with rose petals usually reserved for holidays.
 “I taught him to do that,” Blackmoore said with pride. “It’s an odd thing, really. The crowd cheers
for him, yet they come hoping every time he’ll get beaten.”
 “Has he ever lost a bout?”
 “Never, Your Highness. Nor will he. Yet people keep hoping, and the money keeps flowing.”
 Arthas eyed him. “As long as the royal coffers see their proper percentage of your earnings,
Lieutenant General, you’ll be permitted to continue the games.” He turned again to the orc, watching
him as he completed his circuit. “He…is completely under control, isn’t he?”
 “Absolutely,” Blackmoore said immediately. “He was raised by humans and taught to fear and
respect us.”
 As if he had heard the comment, though he could not possibly have done so over the thundering
cries of the crowd, Thrall turned to where Arthas, Blackmoore, and Langston sat watching. He
thumped his chest in a salute and then bowed deeply.
 “You see? Utterly my creature,” Blackmoore purred. He rose and lifted a flag, waving it, and across
the ring a solidly built red- haired man waved another flag. Thrall turned toward the door, gripping the
massive battle axe that was his weapon in this bout.
 The guards began to raise the door, and before it had even opened fully, a bear the size of Invincible
surged forward. Its hackles had risen and it barreled straight for Thrall as if it had been launched from
a cannon, its snarl audible even over the roar of the crowd.
 Thrall held his ground, stepping aside at the absolute last minute and bringing the huge axe around
as if it weighed nothing at all. It tore a great rent in the bear’s side, and the animal roared in maddened
pain, whirling and sending blood spattering. Again, the orc stood his ground, resting on the balls of his
bare feet until he moved with a speed that belied his size. He met the bear head- on, shouting taunts in
a guttural voice in perfect Common, and brought the axe crunching down. The bear’s head was nearly
severed from its neck, but it kept running for a few moments before toppling into a quivering heap.
 Thrall threw back his head and cried out his victory. The crowd went mad. Arthas stared.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 38
 There wasn’t a scratch on the orc, and as far as Arthas could tell, the brute wasn’t even particularly
winded.
 “That’s just the opener,” Blackmoore said, smiling at Arthas’s reaction. “Next will be three humans
attacking him. He’s also hampered by the fact that he’s not to kill them, just defeat them. More a
strategic battle than one of brute force, but I confess, there’s something about watching him decapitate
a bear in a single blow that always makes me proud.”
 Three human gladiators, all large, powerfully muscled men, entered the arena and saluted their
opponent and the crowd. Arthas watched as Thrall sized them up and wondered just how smart it was
of Blackmoore to make his pet orc so damn good at fighting. If Thrall ever escaped, he could teach
those skills to other orcs.
 It was possible, despite the increased security. After all, if Orgrim Doomhammer could escape from
the Undercity, in the very heart of the palace, Thrall could escape from Durnholde.

 The state visit lasted five days. During one of those days, late in the evening, Taretha Foxton came
to visit the prince in his private quarters. He was puzzled that his servants did not answer the tentative
knock on the door and was even more startled to see the pretty blond girl standing there carrying a tray
of delicacies. Her eyes were downcast, but her dress was revealing enough that he didn’t speak
immediately.
 She dropped a curtsey. “My lord Blackmoore sent me with this offering of things to tempt you,” she
said. Color suffused her cheeks. Arthas was confused.
 “I—tell your master thank you, although I am not hungry. And I’m wondering what he’s done with
my servants.”
 “They have been invited to a repast with the other servants,” Taretha explained. She still didn’t look
up.
 “I see. Well, that’s kind of the lieutenant general; I’m sure the men appreciate it.”
 She didn’t move.
 “Is there anything else, Taretha?”
 The pink in her cheeks deepened, and she lifted her eyes to him. They were calm, resigned. “My lord
Blackmoore sent me with this offering of things to tempt you,” she repeated. “Things you might enjoy.”
 Understanding burst upon him then. Understanding, and embarrassment, and irritation, and
anger. He composed himself with an effort—it was hardly the girl’s fault, indeed, she was the one being
ill used.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 39
 “Taretha,” he said, “I’ll take the food, with thanks. I need nothing else.”
 “Your Highness, I’m afraid he will insist.”
 “Tell him I said it’s fine.”
 “Sir, you don’t understand. If I come back he—”
 He glanced down at the hands holding the tray, at the long hair draped just so. Arthas stepped
forward and lifted her trailing hair out of the way, frowning at the brownish- blue fading marks on her
wrists and throat.
 “I see,” he said. “Come inside, then.” Once she had entered, he closed the door and turned to her.
 “Stay for as long as you feel comfortable, then go back to him. In the meantime, I can’t possibly eat
all this.” He gestured for her to sit and took a chair opposite her, snagging a small pastry and grinning.
 Taretha blinked at him. It took a moment for her to understand what he was saying, and then
cautious relief and gratitude spread over her face as she poured the wine. After a little while, she began
to respond to his questions with more than a few polite words, and they spent the next few hours
talking before they agreed it was time for her to return. As she picked up the tray, she turned to him.
 “Your Highness—it pleases me so much to know that the man who will be our next king has such a
kind heart. The lady you choose to make your queen will be a very lucky woman.”
 He smiled and closed the door behind her, leaning on it for a moment.
 The lady he would choose to make his queen. He recalled his conversation with Calia; fortunately
for his sister, Terenas had started to have some suspicions about Prestor—nothing that could be
proven, but enough for second thoughts.
 Arthas was almost of age—a year older than Calia had been when their father had nearly betrothed
her to Prestor. He supposed he’d have to start thinking about finding a queen sooner or later.
 Tomorrow he would be leaving, and not a minute too soon.

 The winter chill was in the air. Autumn’s last glorious days were gone, and the trees, once shades of
gold and red and orange, were now bare skeletons against a gray sky. In a few more months, Arthas
would reach his nineteenth year and be inducted into the Order of the Silver Hand, and he was more
than ready. His training with Muradin had ended a few months ago, and he had now begun sparring
with Uther. It was different, but similar. What Muradin had taught was attentiveness and a
willingness to win the battle no matter what. The paladins had a more ritualistic way of looking at
battle, and focused more on the attitude one brought into the fight than the actual mechanics of
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 40
swordplay. Arthas found both methods valid, although he was beginning to wonder if he’d ever have
the chance to use what he had learned in a true battle.
 Normally, he’d be in prayer session now, but his father was off on a diplomatic visit to Stromgarde,
and Uther had accompanied him. Which meant that now Arthas had afternoons free for a few days,
and he was not about to waste them, even if the weather was less than perfect. He clung easily and
familiarly to Invincible as they galloped over the glade, the animal’s stride only slightly slowed by a few
inches of snow on the ground. He could see his breath and that of the great white horse as Invincible
tossed his head and snorted.
 It was starting to snow again now, not the soft fat flakes that drifted lazily down but small, hard
crystals that stung. Arthas frowned and pressed on. A little farther, then he would turn back, he told
himself. He might even stop at the Balnir farm. It had been a while since he had been there; Jorum and
Jarim would likely be interested to see the magnificent horse that the gawky little colt had grown into.
 The impulse, having struck, now demanded to be obeyed, and Arthas turned Invincible with a
subtle pressure from his left leg. The horse wheeled, obedient and completely in tune with his master’s
desires. The snow was picking up, tiny needles digging into his exposed skin, and Arthas pulled the
cape up over his head for a little more protection. Invincible shook his head, his skin twitching as it did
when he was being annoyed by insects in the summer. He galloped down the path, stretching his neck
forward, enjoying the exertion every bit as much as Arthas.
 They were coming up on the jump soon, and shortly after that, a warm stable for the steed and a hot
mug of tea for his rider before they headed back to the palace. Arthas’s face was starting to become
numb with the cold, and his hands in their fine leather gloves weren’t much better. He tightened his
chilled hands over the reins, forcing his fingers to bend, and gathered himself as Invincible leaped—no,
he reminded himself, flew, they flew over this jump like—
 —except they didn’t fly. At the last minute, Arthas felt the hideous sensation of Invincible’s rear
hooves slipping on the icy stone, and the horse flailed, neighing, his legs frantically trying to get a
secure footing on thin air. Arthas’s throat was suddenly raw, and he realized he was screaming as
jagged stone, not smooth snow- encrusted grass, rushed up to meet them with lethal speed. He pulled
hard on the reins, as if that could do something, as if anything could do something—
 The sound cut through his stupor, and he blinked his way back to consciousness with the bonechilling shriek of a beast in agony clawing at his brain. He couldn’t move at first, though his body
spasmed of its own accord, trying to move toward the awful cries. Finally he was able to sit up. Pain
shot through him and he added his own gasp of agony to the hideous cacophony, and he realized he’d
probably broken at least one rib, probably more.
 The snow had picked up and was coming down hard and heavy now. He could barely see three feet
in front of him. He shut out the pain, craning his neck, trying to find—
 Invincible. His eye was drawn to movement and the widening pool of crimson that melted the
snow, that steamed in the cold.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 41
 “No,” Arthas whispered, and struggled to his feet. The world went black around the edges and he
almost lost consciousness again, but through sheer will hung on. Slowly, he made his way to the
panicked animal, struggling against the pain and the driving wind and snow that threatened to knock
him over.
 Invincible was churning up the bloodied snow with two powerful, unharmed rear legs and two
shattered forelegs. Arthas felt his stomach heave at the sight of the limbs, once so long and straight and
clean and powerful, hanging at odd angles as Invincible kept trying and failing to stand. Then the
image was mercifully blurred by the snow and the rush of hot tears that spilled down his cheeks.
 He slogged toward his horse, sobbing, dropping to his knees beside the maddened animal and
trying to do—what? This was no scratch, to be quickly bound so that Invincible could be led to a warm
stable and hot mash. Arthas reached for the animal’s head, wanting to touch him, to calm him
somehow, but Invincible was manic with agony. And he kept screaming.
 Help. There were priests and Sir Uther—maybe they could heal—
 Pain greater than physical shot through the youth. The bishop had gone with his father to
Stromgarde, as had Uther. There might be a priest in another village, but Arthas didn’t know where,
and with the storm—
 He shrank back from the animal, covering his ears and closing his eyes, sobbing so that his whole
body shook. With the storm, he could never find a healer before Invincible either died of his injuries or
froze to death. Arthas wasn’t even sure he could find the Balnir homestead, even though it could not be
far. The world was white, everywhere save where the dying horse, who had trusted him enough to leap
off an icy embankment, lay churning up a steaming crimson pool.
 Arthas knew what he had to do, and he couldn’t do it.
 He would never know how long he sat there, weeping, trying to shut out the sight and sound of his
beloved horse in agony, until finally Invincible’s struggles slowed. He lay in the snow, his sides heaving,
his eyes rolling in torment.
 Arthas couldn’t feel his face or limbs, but somehow he managed to move toward the beast. Every
breath was agony, and he welcomed the pain. This was his fault. His fault. He took the great head in
his lap, and for a brief, merciful moment he wasn’t sitting in the snow with a wounded beast, but sitting
in a stable while a broodmare gave birth. For that moment, everything was all just beginning, and not
coming to this shocking, sickening, avoidable end.
 His tears fell on the horse’s broad cheek. Invincible trembled, his brown eyes wide with now- silent
pain. Arthas removed his gloves and ran his hand along the pink- gray muzzle, feeling the warmth of
Invincible’s breath against his hands. Then, slowly, he eased the horse’s head from his lap, got to his
feet, and fumbled with his warmed hand for his sword. His feet sank in the red puddle of melted snow
as he stood over the fallen animal.
 “I’m sorry,” he said. “I’m so sorry.”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 42
 Invincible regarded him calmly, trustingly, as if he somehow understood what was about to happen,
and the need for it. It was more than Arthas could bear, and for a moment tears again clouded his
vision. He blinked them back hard.
 Arthas lifted the sword and brought it straight down.
 He did this right, at least; pierced Invincible’s great heart with a single strong blow from arms that
should have been too chilled to do so. He felt the sword pierce skin, flesh, scrape against bone, and
impale itself into the earth below. Invincible arched once, then shuddered and lay still.
 Jorum and Jarim found him there some time later, after the snow had tapered off, curled up tightly
against the cooling corpse of a once- glorious animal brimming with life and energy. As the elder man
bent to pick him up, Arthas cried out with pain.
 “Sorry, lad,” Jorum said, his voice almost unbearably kind. “For hurting you, and for the accident.”
 “Yes,” Arthas said weakly, “the accident. He lost his footing…”
 “And no wonder in this weather. That storm came on quickly. You’re lucky you’re alive. Come on—
we’ll get you inside and send someone to the palace.”
 As he shifted in the farmer’s strong grip, Arthas said, “Bury him…here? So I can come visit?”
 Balnir exchanged glances with his son, then nodded. “Aye, of course. He was a noble steed.”
 Arthas craned his neck to look at the body of the horse he had named Invincible. He would let them
all think it was an accident, because he could not bear to tell anyone what he had done.
 And he made a vow then and there that if anyone else ever needed protection—that if sacrifices had
to be made for the welfare of others—he would do it.
 Whatever it takes, he thought.
 World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 CHAPTER FIVE
 Summer was in full blaze, and the merciless sun beat down on His Royal Highness Prince Arthas
Menethil as he rode through the streets of Stormwind. He was in a foul mood, despite the fact that this
was a day that he was supposed to have been looking forward to all his life. The sun glinted off the full
plate armor he wore, and Arthas thought he’d bake to death before he reached the cathedral. Sitting
atop his new charger only served to remind him that the horse, while powerful, well- trained, and wellbred, was not Invincible, gone for only a few months and bitterly missed. And he found that his mind
had suddenly gone blank regarding what he was supposed to do once the ceremony began.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 43
 Beside him rode his father, who seemed completely unaware of his son’s irritation. “This has been a
day long in coming, my son,” Terenas said, turning to smile at Arthas.
 Despite the heat and the weight of the helm he wore, Arthas was glad of it; it concealed his face,
and he wasn’t sure he could fake a convincing smile right now. “Indeed it has, Father,” he replied,
keeping his voice calm.
 It was one of the biggest celebrations Stormwind had ever seen. In addition to Terenas, many other
kings, nobility, and famous personages were in attendance, riding like a parade through the city’s white
cobbled streets to the massive Cathedral of Light, damaged during the First War but now restored
and even more glorious than before.
 Arthas’s boyhood friend Varian, king of Stormwind, was now married and a new father. He had
opened the palace to all the visiting royalty and their retinues. Sitting with Varian last night, drinking
mead and talking, had been the highlight of the trip for Arthas so far. The hurting, traumatized youth
of a decade ago had grown into a confident, handsome, centered king. Somewhere along about early
morning, after midnight and before dawn, they had gone to the armory, fetched wooden training
swords, and gone at each other for a long time, laughing and recounting memories, their prowess only
a little the worse for the alcohol they’d consumed. Varian, trained since early childhood, had always
been good and now he was better. But so was Arthas, and he gave as good as he got.
 But now it was all formality, incredibly hot armor, and a nagging sense that he didn’t deserve the
honor that was about to be bestowed upon him.
 In a rare moment, Arthas had spoken of his feelings to Uther. The intimidating paladin, who, since
Arthas was old enough to remember, had been the very image of rock- solid steadfastness to the Light,
had startled the prince with his reply.
 “Lad, no one feels ready. No one feels he deserves it. And you know why? Because no one does. It’s
grace, pure and simple. We are inherently unworthy, simply because we’re human, and all human
beings—aye, and elves, and dwarves, and all the other races—are flawed. But the Light loves us
anyway. It loves us for what we sometimes can rise to in rare moments. It loves us for what we can do
to help others. And it loves us because we can help it share its message by striving daily to be worthy,
even though we understand that we can’t ever truly become so.”
 He’d clapped a hand on Arthas’s shoulder, giving him a rare, simple smile. “So stand there today, as
I did, feeling that you can’t possibly deserve it or ever be worthy, and know that you’re in the same place
every single paladin has ever stood.”
 It comforted Arthas a little.
 He squared his shoulders, tilted the visor back, and smiled and waved to the crowd that was
cheering so happily on this hot summer day. Rose petals were showered upon him, and from
somewhere trumpets blared. They had reached the cathedral. Arthas dismounted and a groom led
away his charger. Another servant stepped up to take the helm he tugged off. His blond hair was damp
with sweat, and he quickly ran a gauntleted hand over it.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 44
 Arthas had never been to Stormwind before, and he was impressed by the combination of serenity
and power the cathedral radiated. Slowly, he moved up the carpeted carved stairs, grateful for the
sudden coolness of the building’s stone interior. The fragrance of the incense was calming and familiar;
it was the same as that which his family burned in their small chapel.
 There was no giddy throng here now, just silent, respectful rows of prominent personages and
clergy. Arthas recognized several faces: Genn Greymane, Thoras Trollbane, Admiral Daelin
Proudmoore—
 Arthas blinked, then his lips curved into a smile. Jaina! She had certainly grown up in the years since
he had last seen her. Not quite a drop- dead beauty, but pretty, the liveliness and intelligence he’d
responded to as a boy still radiating from her like a beacon. She caught Arthas’s look and smiled a little
in return, inclining her head in respect.
 Arthas returned his attention to the altar he approached, but felt a little bit of the trepidation leave
his heart. He hoped there would be a chance for him to talk to her after all the formalities were taken
care of.
 Archbishop Alonsus Faol awaited him at the altar. The archbishop reminded Arthas more of
Greatfather Winter than of any of the rulers he had hitherto met. Short and stout, with a long flowing
snow- white beard and bright eyes, even in the midst of solemn ceremony Faol radiated warmth and
kindliness. Faol waited until Arthas approached him and knelt before him respectfully before opening a
large book and speaking.
 “In the Light, we gather to empower our brother. In its grace, he will be made anew. In its power,
he shall educate the masses. In its strength, he shall combat the shadow. And in its wisdom, he shall
lead his brethren to the eternal rewards of paradise.”
 On his left, several men—and a few women, Arthas noticed—dressed in flowing white robes stood
still and poised. Some held censors, which swayed almost hypnotically. Others bore large candles. One
carried an embroidered blue stole. Arthas had been introduced to many of them earlier, but found that
their names had gone right out of his head. That was unusual for him—he was genuinely interested in
those who worked for him and served under him, and made an effort to get to know all their names.
 Archbishop Faol asked the clerics to bestow their blessings upon Arthas. They did, the one who
bore the blue stole coming forward to drape it about the prince’s neck and anointing his brow with
holy oil.
 “By the grace of the Light, may your brethren be healed,” the cleric said.
 Faol turned to the men on Arthas’s right. “Knights of the Silver Hand, if you deem this man worthy,
place your blessings upon him.”
 In contrast to the first group, these men, standing at attention in heavy, gleaming plate armor, were
all known to Arthas. They were the original paladins of the Silver Hand, and it was the first time they
had assembled since their induction many years past. Uther, of course; Tirion Fordring, aging but still
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 45
powerful and graceful, now governor of Hearthglen; the six- and- a- half- foot Saidan Dathrohan, and
the pious, bushy- bearded Gavinrad. One was missing from their number—Turalyon, right hand to
Anduin Lothar in the Second War, who was lost with the company that had ventured through the
Dark Portal when Arthas was twelve.
 Gavinrad stepped forth, holding an enormous, heavy- looking hammer, its silver head etched with
runes and its sturdy haft wrapped in blue leather. He placed the hammer in front of Arthas, then
stepped back to stand with his brethren. It was Uther the Lightbringer himself, Arthas’s mentor in the
order, who next came forward. In his hands he carried a pair of ceremonial shoulder plates. Uther was
the most controlled man Arthas had ever known, and yet his eyes were bright with unshed tears as he
placed the armor on Arthas’s broad shoulders. He spoke in a voice that was both powerful and
trembling with emotion.
 “By the strength of the Light, may your enemies be undone.” His hand lingered a moment on
Arthas’s shoulder, then he, too, retreated.
 Archbishop Faol smiled at the prince kindly. Arthas met the gaze evenly, no longer worried. He
remembered everything now.
 “Arise and be recognized,” Faol bade him. Arthas did so.
 “Do you, Arthas Menethil, vow to uphold the honor and codes of the Order of the Silver Hand?”
 Arthas blinked, momentarily surprised at the lack of his title. Of course, he reasoned, I’m being
inducted as a man, not a prince. “I do.”
 “Do you vow to walk in the grace of the Light and spread its wisdom to your fellow man?”
 “I do.”
 “Do you vow to vanquish evil wherever it be found, and protect the innocent with your very life?”
 “I d—by my blood and honor, I do.” That was close, he’d almost messed up.
 Faol gave him a quick wink of reassurance, then turned to address both the clerics and the paladins.
“Brothers and sisters—you who have gathered here to bear witness—raise your hands and let the Light
illuminate this man.”
 The clerics and paladins all lifted right hands, which were now suffused by a soft, golden glow.
They pointed at Arthas, directing the radiance toward him. Arthas’s eyes were wide with wonder, and
he waited for the glorious glow to envelop him.
 Nothing happened.
 The moment stretched on.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 46
 Sweat broke out on Arthas’s brow. What was going wrong? Why wasn’t the Light wrapping itself
around him in blessing and benediction?
 And then the sunlight streaming in through windows in the ceiling slowly began to move toward
the prince standing alone in shining armor, and Arthas exhaled in relief. This had to be what Uther
had spoken of. The feeling of unworthiness that Uther assured him all paladins felt simply seemed to
drag out the moment. The words Uther had spoken came back to him: No one feels he deserves it…its
grace, pure and simple…but the Light loves us anyway.
 Now it shone down on him, in him, through him, and he was forced to shut his eyes against the
almost blinding radiance. It warmed at first, then seared, and he winced slightly. He felt—scoured.
Emptied, scrubbed clean, then filled again, and he felt the Light swell inside him and then fade away to
a tolerable level. He blinked and reached for the hammer, the symbol of the order. As his hand closed
about the haft, he looked up at Archbishop Faol, whose benign smile widened.
 “Arise, Arthas Menethil, paladin defender of Lordaeron. Welcome to the Order of the Silver Hand.”
 Arthas couldn’t help it. He grinned as he grasped the enormous hammer, so large that for a brief
moment he thought he wouldn’t be able to lift it, and swung it upward with a whoop. The Light, he
realized, made the hammer seem to weigh less in his hands. At his exultant cry, the cathedral suddenly
began to ring with the sound of answering cheers and applause. Arthas found himself roughly
embraced by his new brothers and sisters, and then all remnants of formality were torn away as his
father, Varian, and others crowded the altar area. Much laughter was had as Varian tried to clap him
on the shoulder, only to have his hand sting when he struck the hard metal of the shoulder plates. And
then somehow Arthas was turned around and stared into the blue- eyed, smiling face of Lady Jaina
Proudmoore.
 They were mere inches apart, jostled and pressed together by the throng that had somehow sprung
up around the newest member of the Order of the Silver Hand, and Arthas wasn’t about to let the
unique opportunity slip away. Almost at once his left arm slipped around her trim waist and he pulled
her to him. She looked startled, but not displeased, as he hugged her. She returned the hug, laughing
against his chest for a moment, then pulling back, still smiling.
 For a moment, the happy sounds of a celebrating crowd on a hot summer afternoon went away, and
all Arthas could see was this suntanned, smiling girl. Could he kiss her? Should he kiss her? He
certainly wanted to. But even as he debated she disentangled herself and stepped back, and her fairhaired girlish form was replaced by another fair- haired, girlish form. Calia laughed and hugged her
brother tightly.
 “We’re all so proud of you, Arthas,” she exclaimed. He grinned and returned the embrace, happy to
hear his sister’s approval, sorry that he’d not gone ahead and kissed the admiral’s daughter. “You will
make a wonderful paladin, I’m sure of it.”
 “Well done, my son,” Terenas said. “I am a proud father today.”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 47
 Arthas’s eyes narrowed. Today? What was meant by that? Was his father not proud of him on other
days? He was suddenly angry, and not certain why or with whom. The Light, delaying its approval;
Jaina backing away from him right at the moment when he could have kissed her; Terenas and his
comment.
 He forced a smile and began to shoulder his way through the crowd. He’d had enough of this press
of people, few of whom really knew him, none of whom understood.
 Arthas was nineteen. At the same age, Varian had been king for a full year. He was of an age to do
whatever he wanted to, and now had the blessing of the Silver Hand to guide him. He didn’t want to
simply linger at the palace of Lordaeron, or do boring state visits. He wanted to do something…fun.
Something that his power, his position, his abilities would earn him.
 And he knew exactly what he wanted that something to be.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 48
 World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King


 PART TWO
 THE BRIGHT LADY
 World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 INTERLUDE
 It was exactly the sort of day Jaina Proudmoore didn’t like—sullen, stormy, and bitterly cold. While
the ocean breezes always made Theramore feel cool, even in the hot summer months, the chill of the
wind and rain that now pummeled the city cut to the bone. The ocean churned unhappily, the sky
above it gray and menacing. It showed no signs of letting up. Outside, training fields turned to mud,
travelers sought the shelter of the inn, and Dr. VanHowzen would need to watch the injured in his care
for signs of illness brought on by the sudden cold and wetness. Jaina’s guards stood in the downpour
without complaint. No doubt they were miserable. Jaina ordered one of her attendants to take the pot
of tea she had just brewed for her and her chancellor down to the stalwart guards enduring their duty.
She could wait for a second pot to be ready.
 Thunder rumbled and there was a flash of lightning. Jaina, snug in her tower surrounded by the
books and papers she so loved, shivered and drew her cloak about her more closely, then turned to one
who was doubtless even more uncomfortable than she.
 Magna Aegwynn, former Guardian of Tirisfal, mother to the great Magus Medivh, once the most
powerful woman in the world, sat in a chair drawn close to the fire, sipping a cup of tea. Her gnarled
hands closed about the cup, seeking its warmth. Her long hair, white as freshly fallen snow, was loose
about her shoulders. She looked up as Jaina approached and sat in the chair across from her. Her
green eyes, a deep, knowing emerald, missed nothing.
 “You’re thinking about him.”
 Jaina scowled and looked into the fire, trying to distract herself with the dancing flames. “I didn’t
know being a Guardian meant you could read minds.”
 “Minds? Pfft. It’s your face and bearing I can read like a primer, child. That furrow in your brow
crinkles just so when it’s he who occupies your mind. Besides, you always get in this mood when the
weather turns.”
 Jaina shivered. “Am I truly so easy to read?”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 49
 Aegwynn’s sharp features softened and she patted Jaina’s hand. “Well, I’ve got a thousand years of
observation under my belt. I’m a bit better at reading people than most.”
 Jaina sighed. “It’s true. When the weather is cold, I do think of him. About what happened. About
whether I could have done anything.”
 Aegwynn sighed. “A thousand years and I don’t think I’ve ever really been in love. Too much else to
worry about. But if it’s any consolation to you—he’s been on my mind, too.”
 Jaina blinked, surprised and unsettled by the comment. “You’ve been thinking about Arthas?”
 The former Guardian regarded her keenly. “The Lich King. He’s not Arthas, not anymore.”
 “I don’t need to be reminded of that,” Jaina said, a touch too sharply. “Why do you—”
 “Can’t you feel it?”
 Slowly, Jaina nodded. She had tried to chalk it up to the weather and the tensions that always ran
high when it was so damp and unpleasant. But Aegwynn was suggesting that there was more to it
than that, and Jaina Proudmoore, thirty years of age, ruler of Theramore Isle, knew the old woman was
right. Old woman. A smile flickered on her lips as she thought about the words. She herself was well
past her own youth, a youth in which Arthas Menethil had played so significant a role.
 “Tell me of him,” Aegwynn said, sitting back in her chair. At that moment, one of the servants came
with a fresh pot of tea and cookies hot from the oven. Jaina accepted a cup gratefully.
 “I’ve told you all I know.”
 “No,” Aegwynn retorted. “You told me the facts of what happened. I want you to tell me about him.
Arthas Menethil. Because whatever’s going on right now up in Northrend—and yes, I think
something is going on—it’s about Arthas, not the Lich King. Not yet at any rate. Besides,” and the old
woman grinned, the wrinkles that lined her face overshadowed by the impish, girlish glint in her
emerald eyes, “it’s a cold and rainy day. And that’s exactly the sort of day stories were made for.”
 World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 CHAPTER SIX
 Jaina Proudmoore hummed a little as she strode through the gardens of Dalaran. She’d been here
for eight years now, and the city never lost its sense of wonder. Everything here emanated magic, and
to her it was almost like a scent, a fragrance of everything in bloom, and she inhaled it with a smile.
 Of course, some of that “fragrance” was that of actual flowers in bloom; the gardens of this place
were as saturated with magic as everything else. She had never seen healthier, more colorful flowers, or
eaten more delicious fruits and vegetables than here. And the knowledge! Jaina felt she had learned
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 50
more in the last eight years than in her entire life—and most of that in the last two, since Archmage
Antonidas had formally taken her as his apprentice. Few things contented her more than sitting curled
up in the sun with a cold glass of sweet nectar and a pile of books. Of course, some of the rarer
parchments needed to be protected from sunlight and spilled nectar, so the next best thing was sitting
inside one of the many rooms, wearing gloves so her hands would not damage the fragile paper,
carefully perusing something that was older almost than she could comprehend.
 But for now, she just wanted to wander in the gardens, feeling the living earth beneath her feet,
smelling the incredible scents, and, when hunger gnawed at her stomach, reaching up and plucking a
ripe goldenbark apple warm from the sunlight and crunching it happily.
 “In Quel’Thalas,” came a smooth, cultured voice, “there are trees that tower over these in a glory of
white bark and golden leaves, that all but sing in the evening breezes. I think you would enjoy seeing
them someday.”
 Jaina turned to offer Prince Kael’thas Sunstrider, son to Anasterian, king of the quel’dorei elves, a
smile and a deep curtsey. “Your Highness,” she said. “I wasn’t aware you’d returned. A pleasure. And
yes, I’m certain I would.”
 Jaina was the daughter, if not of royalty, of nobility and of a ruler. Her father, Admiral Daelin
Proudmoore, ruled the city- state of Kul Tiras, and Jaina had grown up accustomed to interaction with
nobility. And yet, Prince Kael’thas unnerved her. She wasn’t quite sure what it was. He was handsome,
certainly, with that grace and beauty that all elves possessed. Tall, with hair like spun gold that fell
halfway down his back, he always looked to her like a figure out of legend rather than a real, living
person. Even though he was currently clad in the simpler violet and gold robes of a mage of Dalaran
and not the lavish robes he would wear to official occasions, he never seemed to lose his stiffness.
Perhaps that was it—there was a sort of…antiquated formality about him. Too, he was much older
than she, though he looked about her age. He was sharply intelligent and an extremely talented and
powerful mage, and some of the students whispered that he was one of the Six, the secret membership
of the highest ranking magi of Dalaran. So she supposed she wasn’t that much of a country bumpkin to
find him intimidating.
 He reached up and took an apple himself, biting into it. “There is a certain heartiness about food
native to human lands that I have come to appreciate.” He smiled conspiratorially. “Sometimes elven
food, while certainly delicious and attractively presented, leaves one still hungry for something more
substantial.”
 Jaina smiled. Prince Kael’thas always tried so hard to put her at ease. She only wished it worked
better. “Few things are nicer than an apple and a slice of Dalaran sharp,” she agreed. The silence
stretched between then, awkward despite the casualness of the setting and the warmth of the sun. “So,
you are back for a while?”
 “Yes, my business in Silvermoon has concluded for the time being. So I should not need to depart
again anytime soon.” He looked at her as he took another bite of the apple, his handsome features
schooled to be impassive. Still, Jaina knew he was waiting for her reaction.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 51
 “We are all pleased at your return, Your Highness.”
 He wagged a finger at her. “Ah, I’ve told you, I would prefer it if you would simply call me Kael.”
 “I’m sorry, Kael.”
 He looked at her and a hint of sorrow passed over his perfect features, gone so quickly that Jaina
wondered if she had imagined it. “How do your studies progress?”
 “Very well,” she said, warming to the conversation now that it was back on scholastic ground.
“Watch!” She pointed to a squirrel perched in a high branch, nibbling on an apple, and murmured a
spell. At once it transformed into a sheep, a look of comical surprise on its face as the branch broke
beneath its weight and it started to fall. Immediately Jaina extended a hand and the squirrel- sheep
halted in midair. Gently she lowered it unharmed to the ground. It bleated at her, twitching its ears,
and after a moment again resumed the shape of a very confused- looking squirrel. It sat on its haunches,
chattered at her angrily, then with a flick of its fluffy tail leaped up into the tree again.
 Kael’thas chuckled. “Well done! No more setting books on fire, I hope?”
 Jaina turned scarlet, remembering the incident. When she’d first arrived, her talent with fire had
needed some desperate honing. She’d accidentally incinerated a tome while working with Kael’thas—
one he’d actually been holding at the time. He’d responded by insisting that for the next few months,
she would need to practice all fire spells in the vicinity of the pools that encircled the prison area. “Er…
no, that hasn’t happened for a while.”
 “I’m pleased to hear it. Jaina…” He stepped forward, tossing away the half- eaten apple, smiling
gently. “I wasn’t making idle conversation when I invited you to come to Quel’Thalas. Dalaran is a
marvelous city, and some of the finest magi in Azeroth live here. I know you’re learning much. But I
think you would enjoy visiting an entire land where magic is so much a part of the culture. Not just a
part of the city, or confined to a handful of elite, educated magi. Magic is the birthright of every citizen.
We are all embraced by the Sunwell. Surely you must have some curiosity about it yourself?”
 She smiled at him. “I do indeed. And I would love to go there someday. But I think for the moment,
my studies can be best advanced here.” Her smile stretched into a grin. “Where people know what to
do when I light books on fire.”
 He chuckled at that, but his sigh was sad. “Perhaps you are right. And now if you will excuse me—”
He gave her a wry grin. “Archmage Antonidas demands a recounting of my time in Silvermoon.
Nonetheless, this prince and mage looks deeply forward to more demonstrations of how your training
has advanced…and more time spent with you.”
 Kael’thas placed a hand to his heart and bowed. Not knowing how to respond, Jaina settled for a
curtsey, then watched him go, striding through the gardens like the sun, head high, every inch of him
exuding confidence and coiled grace. Even the dirt seemed unwilling to cling to his boots and robe
hem.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 52
 Jaina crunched a final bite of the apple, then she, too, tossed it away. The squirrel she’d
polymorphed earlier scurried headfirst down the trunk, to claim a prize more reachable than the apple
that still hung on the tree.
 A pair of hands abruptly covered her eyes.
 She started, but only in mild surprise—no one who posed a threat would be able to breach the
powerful wards erected about the magical city.
 “Guess who?” a male voice whispered, but still holding tones of mirth. Jaina, her eyes covered,
considered, fighting back a smile.
 “Hm…. your hands are calloused, so you’re not a wizard,” she said. “You smell like horses and
leather….” Her own small hands brushed feather- light over strong fingers, touching a large ring. She
felt the shape of the stone, the design—the seal of Lordaeron.
 “Arthas!” she exclaimed, surprise and delight warming her voice as she turned to face him. He
uncovered her eyes at once, and grinned down at her. He was less physically perfect than Kael’thas; his
hair, like the elven prince’s, was blond, but simply yellow rather than looking like spun gold. He was
tall and well- built, seeming solid rather than fluidly graceful to her. And despite the fact that he was of
a rank equal to Kael’thas—although she wondered if privately Kael doubted that; the elves seemed to
think themselves superior to all humans, regardless of rank—there was an ease about him that Jaina
responded to immediately.
 Decorum returned to her and she dropped a curtsey. “Your Highness, this is an unlooked- for
surprise. What are you doing here, if I may ask?” A sudden thought sobered her. “All is well in Capital
City, is it not?”
 “Arthas, please. In Dalaran, the magi rule, and mere men must give deference.” His sea- green eyes
twinkled with good humor. “And we are comrades in mischief, after sneaking off to see the internment
camps, aren’t we?”
 She relaxed and smiled. “I suppose we are.”
 “In answer to your question, everything is just fine. In fact, so little of real import is going on that my
father agreed to my request to come here for a few months to study.”
 “Study? But—you are a member of the Order of the Silver Hand. You’re not going to become a
mage, are you?”
 He laughed and drew her arm through his as they walked back toward the student’s quarters. She
easily fell in step with him.
 “Hardly. Such intellectual dedication is beyond me, I fear. But it did occur to me that one of the
best places in Azeroth to learn about history, the nature of magic, and other things a king needs to
know about is right here in Dalaran. Fortunately, Father and your archmage agreed.”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 53
 As he spoke, he covered Jaina’s hand, resting on his arm, with his own. It was a friendly and
courteous gesture, but Jaina felt a little spark go through her. She glanced up at him. “I’m impressed.
The boy who sneaked me out in the middle of the night to go spying on orcs was not quite so
interested in history and knowledge.”
 Arthas chuckled and bent his head conspiratorially down to hers. “Honestly? I’m still not. I mean, I
am, but that’s not the real reason I came here.”
 “All right, now I’m confused. Why did you come to Dalaran then?” They had reached her quarters
and she stopped, turning to face him and releasing his arm.
 He didn’t answer at first, merely held her gaze with his and smiled knowingly. Then he took her
hand and kissed it—a courtly gesture, one she had experienced many times from many noble
gentlemen. His lips lingered just an instant longer than was strictly proper, and he didn’t release her
hand at once.
 Her eyes widened. Was he implying…had he really contrived to come to Dalaran for a few months
—no mean feat, Antonidas was notoriously leery of outsiders—simply…to see her? Before she could
recover sufficiently to ask the question, he winked at her and bowed.
 “I will see you tonight at dinner, my lady.”

 The dinner was a formal one. The return of Prince Kael’thas and the arrival of Prince Arthas on the
same day had sent those who served the Kirin Tor into a flurry of activity. There was a large dining
room that was reserved for special occasions, and it was here that the dinner was hosted.
 A table large enough to seat over two dozen stretched from one end of the room to the other.
Overhead, three chandeliers twinkled with brightly burning candles, echoed by the candles burning on
the table. Sconces along the walls held torches, and to keep the ambiance gentle while still providing
sufficient illumination, several globes hovered around the sides of the room, ready to be summoned
where a little extra light might be needed. Servants rarely intruded, save to bring out and clear the
courses; bottles of wine poured themselves with the flick of a finger. Flute, harp, and lute provided
soothing background music, their graceful notes created by magic rather than human hands or breaths
of air.
 Archmage Antonidas presided in one of his rare appearances. He was a tall man, seeming all the
taller because of his extremely thin build. His long beard now had much more gray than brown in it,
and his head was completely bald, but his eyes were alert and piercing. Present also was Archmage
Krasus, upright and alert, his hair catching the candle- and torchlight to gleam mostly silver, with red
and black streaks. Many others were in attendance, all of high rank. Jaina, in fact, was far and away the
lowest- ranking person present, and she was the archmage’s apprentice.
 Jaina came from a military background, and one of the things her father had instilled in her was a
solid understanding of her strengths and weaknesses. “It is as much of a mistake to underestimate
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 54
yourself as to overestimate yourself,” Daelin had once told her. “False modesty is as bad as false pride.
Know exactly what you are capable of at any moment, and act accordingly. Any other path is folly—and
could be deadly in battle.”
 She knew she was deft in the magical arts. She was intelligent and focused, and had learned much
in the short time she had already been here. Surely Antonidas would not take on an apprentice as a
charity case. With no sense of the false pride her father had warned her so judiciously about, she
understood she had the potential to become a powerful mage. She wanted to succeed on her own
merit, not be advanced because an elven prince enjoyed her company. She fought to keep her face from
betraying her irritation as she spooned up another mouthful of turtle bisque.
 The conversation, not surprisingly as the internment camps were located fairly close to Dalaran,
focused on the orcs, although the mage city liked to think itself above such things.
 Kael reached a long, elegant hand for another slice of bread and began buttering it. “Lethargic or
no,” he said, “they are dangerous.”
 “My father, King Terenas, agrees with your assessment, Prince Kael’thas,” Arthas said, smiling
charmingly at the elf. “That’s why the camps exist. It is unfortunate that they cost so much to maintain,
but surely, a little gold is a small price for the safety of the people of Azeroth.”
 “They are beasts, brutes,” said Kael’thas, his normally tenor voice dropping in his disgust. “They and
their dragons damaged Quel’Thalas badly. Only the Sunwell’s energies prevented them from wreaking
even more havoc than they did. You humans could solve the problem of protecting your people without
taxing them so severely by simply executing the creatures.”
 Jaina recalled the one glimpse she had seen of the orcs. They had looked weary to her, broken and
dejected. They’d had children with them.
 “Have you been to the camps, Prince Kael’thas?” she said tartly, speaking before she could stop
herself. “Have you actually seen what they have become?”
 Color rose in Kael’thas’s cheeks for a moment, but he kept his expression pleasant. “No, Lady Jaina,
I have not. Nor do I see any need to. I see what they have done whenever I behold the burned trunks of
the glorious trees of my homeland, and pay my respects to those slain in that attack. And surely you
have not seen them, either. I cannot imagine that so refined a lady would wish to be given a tour of the
camps.”
 Jaina very carefully did not look at Arthas as she replied, “While His Highness gives me a lovely
compliment, I do not think that refinement has any bearing on one’s desire to see justice. Indeed, I
think it rather more likely that a refined individual would not wish to see sentient beings slaughtered
like animals.” She gave him a pleasant smile and continued eating her soup. Kael’thas gave her a
searching look, confused by her reaction.
 “The law is Lordaeron’s, and King Terenas may do as he sees fit in his own realm,” Antonidas broke
in.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 55
 “Dalaran and every other Alliance kingdom also must pay for their upkeep,” said a mage Jaina did
not know. “Surely we have a voice in this, since we are paying for it?”
 Antonidas waved a thin hand. “It is not the issue of who pays for the camps, or indeed whether the
camps are even necessary. It is this strange lethargy of the orcs that intrigues me. I have researched
what little we have on orcish history, and I do not believe it is confinement that renders them so listless.
Nor do I believe it is an illness—at least, not one that we need worry about contracting.”
 Because Antonidas never indulged in idle chatter, everyone stopped their bickering and turned to
listen to him. Jaina was surprised. This was the first she had heard from any of the magi regarding the
orcish situation at all. She had no doubt that this was a deliberate decision on Antonidas’s part to
reveal this information at this time. With both Arthas and Kael’thas present, word would travel swiftly
throughout Lordaeron and Quel’Thalas. Antonidas did little by accident.
 “If it is not an illness, nor a direct result of their internment,” Arthas said pleasantly, “then what do
you think it is, Archmage?”
 Antonidas turned toward the young prince. “It is my understanding that the orcs were not always so
bloodthirsty. Khadgar told me what he had learned from Garona, who—”
 “Garona was the half- breed who murdered King Llane,” Arthas said, all trace of good humor gone.
“With all due respect, I do not think we can trust anything such a creature says.”
 Antonidas lifted up a calming hand, as some of the others began to murmur agreement. “This
information came before she turned traitor,” he said. “And it has been verified through—other sources.”
He smiled a little, deliberately refusing to identify what “other sources” he had consulted. “They
committed themselves to demonic influence. Their skin turned green, their eyes red. I believe they
were saturated with this external darkness by the time of the first invasion. Now they have been cut off
from that source of sustenance. I think we are seeing not an illness, but withdrawal. Demonic energy is
a potent thing. To be denied it would have dire consequences.”
 Kael’thas waved a hand dismissively. “Even if such a theory is correct, why should we care about
them? They were foolish enough to trust demons. They were thoughtless enough to permit themselves
to become addicted to these corruptive energies. I, for one, do not think it is wise to ‘help’ them find a
cure for this addiction, even if it could return them to a peaceful state. Right now, they are powerless
and crushed. It is how I—and anyone in his right mind—prefer to see them, after what they have done
to us.”
 “Ah, but if they can be returned to a peaceful state, then we will not have to keep them locked up in
the camps, and the money can be distributed elsewhere,” Antonidas said mildly, before the entire table
could erupt in argument. “I’m sure King Terenas does not levy these fees simply to line his own
pockets. How does your father fare, Prince Arthas? And your family? I regret that I was unable to
attend your initiation ceremony, but I hear it was quite the event.”
 “Stormwind was most gracious to me,” Arthas said, smiling warmly and digging into the second
course of delicately broiled trout served with sautéed greens. “It was good to see King Varian again.”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 56
 “His lovely queen has recently provided him with an heir, I understand.”
 “Indeed. And if the way little Anduin grips my finger is any indication of how he’ll grip a sword one
day, he’ll make a fine warrior.”
 “While we all pray your coronation day is many years distant, I daresay that a royal wedding would
be welcomed,” Antonidas continued. “Have any young ladies caught your eye, or are you still
Lordaeron’s most eligible bachelor?”
 Kael’thas turned his attention to his plate, but Jaina knew he was following the conversation keenly.
She kept her own face carefully composed.
 Arthas did not look in her direction as he laughed and reached for the wine. “Ah, that would be
telling, would it not? And where’s the fun in that? There’s plenty of time left for such things.”
 Mixed feelings washed over Jaina. She was a little disappointed, but also somewhat relieved.
Perhaps it was best if she and Arthas remained only friends. After all, she had come here to learn how
to be the most accomplished mage she could become, not flirt. A student of magic needed to be
disciplined, to be logical, not emotional. She had duties, and needed to perform them with her full
attention.
 She needed to study.

 “I need to study,” Jaina protested a few days after the dinner, when Arthas approached her leading
two horses.
 “Come on, Jaina.” Arthas grinned. “Even the most diligent student needs to take a break now and
then. It’s a beautiful day and you should be out enjoying it.”
 “I am,” she said. It was true; she was in the gardens with her books, rather than cloistered in one of
the reading rooms.
 “A bit of exercise will help you think better.” He extended a hand to her as she sat underneath the
tree. She smiled despite herself.
 “Arthas, you will be a magnificent king one day,” she said teasingly, grasping his hand and allowing
herself to be pulled to her feet. “No one can seem to deny you anything.”
 He laughed at that and held her horse while she mounted. She was wearing trousers today, light
linen breeches, and was able to sit astride rather than sidesaddle with long robes. He swung up easily
on his own horse a moment later.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 57
 Jaina glanced at the horse he was riding—a bay mare, rather than the white stallion fate had
snatched from him. “I don’t think I ever said how sorry I was about Invincible,” she said quietly. The
mirth left his face, and it was like a shadow passing over the sun. Then the smile returned, slightly
sobered.
 “It’s all right, but thanks. Now—I have picnic supplies and the day awaits. Let’s go!”
 It was a day Jaina would remember for the rest of her life, one of those perfect late summer days
where the sunlight seemed thick and golden as honey. Arthas set a hard pace, but Jaina was an
experienced rider and kept up easily. He took her far away from the city and along stretches of green,
expansive meadows. The horses seemed to be enjoying themselves as much as their riders, their ears
pricked forward and their nostrils flaring as they inhaled the rich scents.
 The picnic was simple but delicious fare—bread, cheese, fruit, some light white wine. Arthas lay
back, folding his arms behind his head, and dozed for a bit while Jaina kicked off her boots, digging her
feet into the thick, soft grass as she sat with her back to a tree, and read for a while. The book was
interesting—A Treatise on the Nature of Teleportation—but the languid heat of the day, the vigorous
exercise, and the soft hum of cicadas served to lull her to sleep as well.

 Jaina awoke some time later slightly chilled; the sun was starting to go down. She sat up, knuckling
the sleep out of her eyes, to realize that Arthas was nowhere to be seen. Nor was his horse. Her own
gelding, reins draped about a tree branch, grazed contentedly.
 Frowning, she got to her feet. “Arthas?” There was no answer. Likely he had just decided to go for a
quick exploration and would be back any moment. She strained to listen for the sound of hoofbeats,
but there were none.
 There were still orcs loose, wandering around. Or so the rumors went. And mountain cats and
bears—less alien but no less dangerous. Mentally Jaina went over her spells in her mind. She was sure
she’d be able to defend herself if she was attacked.
 Well—fairly sure.
 The attack was sudden and silent.
 A thump against the back of her neck and cold wetness was the first and only clue she had. She
gasped and whirled. Her attacker was a blur of motion, leaping to another hiding space with the speed
of a stag, pausing only long enough to fire another missile at her. This one caught her in the mouth and
she started to choke—with laughter. She pawed at the snow, gasping a little as some of it slid down her
shirt.
 “Arthas! You don’t fight fair!”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 58
 Her answer was four snowballs rolled in her direction, and she scrambled to pick them up. He’d
obviously climbed high enough to find the places in the mountains where winter had come early, and
returned with snowballs as trophies. Where was he? There—a flash of his red tunic—
 The fight continued for a while, until both had run out of ammunition. “Truce!” Arthas called, and
when Jaina agreed, laughing so hard she could barely get the word out, he leaped from his place of
concealment among the rocks and ran to her. He hugged her, laughing as well, and she was pleased to
see that he, too, had traces of snow in his hair.
 “I knew it all those years ago,” he said.
 “Knew w- what?” Jaina had been pelted with so many snowballs that despite the fact that it was late
summer, she was chilled. Arthas felt her shivering and tightened his arms around her. Jaina knew she
should pull back; a friendly and spontaneous hug was one thing, but to linger in his embrace was
something else. But she stayed where she was, letting her head rest against his chest, her ear pressed
against his heart, hearing it thump rhythmically and rapidly. She closed her eyes as one hand came up
to stroke her hair, removing bits of snow as he spoke.
 “The day I first saw you, I thought that this would be a girl I could have fun with. Someone who
wouldn’t mind going for a swim on a hot summer day, or”—he stepped back a little, brushing a few bits
of melting pieces of winter off her face and smiling—“or getting a snowball in the face. I didn’t hurt you,
did I?”
 She smiled in return, suddenly warmed. “No. No you didn’t.” Their eyes met and Jaina felt heat
coming to her cheeks. She moved to step back, but his arm encircled her as firmly as an iron band. He
continued to touch her face, trailing strong, calloused fingers down the curve of her cheek.
 “Jaina,” he said quietly, and she shivered, but not from cold, not this time. It was not proper. She
should move back. Instead she lifted her face and closed her eyes.
 The kiss was gentle at first, soft and sweet, the first Jaina had ever known. As if of their own will,
her arms crept up to drape around his neck and she pressed against him as the kiss deepened. She felt
as though she was drowning, and he was the only solid thing in the world.
 This was what—who—she wanted. This youth who was her friend despite his title, who saw and
understood her scholarly character but also knew how to coax forth the playful and adventurous girl
who didn’t often have a chance to come out—who wasn’t often glimpsed.
 But he had seen all of who she was, not just the face she presented to the world.
 “Arthas,” she whispered as she clung to him. “Arthas…”
 World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 CHAPTER SEVEN
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 59
 It was a good few months, in Dalaran. Arthas found, somewhat to his surprise, that he actually was
learning things that would be useful for a king to know. There were also plenty of opportunities to
enjoy the lingering summer and first cool hints of autumn, and he loved riding, even if he felt a pang in
his chest every time he mounted a horse that was not Invincible.
 And there was Jaina.
 He’d not planned on kissing her initially. But when he found himself with her in his arms, her eyes
bright with laughter and good humor, he’d done so. And she’d responded. Her schedule was more
demanding and rigorous than his, and they had not seen each other nearly as much as they had wanted
to. When they had, it was usually at public functions. And both had agreed without discussing it at all
that it would not do to give the rumor mill any grist.
 It lent an extra spice to the relationship. They stole moments when they could—a kiss in an alcove, a
fleeting look at a formal dinner. Their first outing had been completely innocent at the outset; but now
they avoided such things assiduously.
 He memorized her schedule so as to “bump” into her. She found excuses to wander into the stables
or in the courtyard that Arthas and his men used as practice areas to keep their battle skills sharp.
 Arthas loved every risky, daring minute of it.
 Now he waited in a little- used hallway, standing in front of a bookshelf, pretending to peruse the
titles. Jaina would be coming in from her fire spell practice; out of habit, she told him with a slightly
embarrassed grin, she still trained near the jail area and the many pools of water. She’d have to cross
through this area to get to her room. His ears strained for the sound. There it was—the soft, swift pad
of her slippered feet moving across the floor. He turned, taking a book down and pretending to look at
it, watching for her out of the corner of her eye.
 Jaina was clad, as usual, in traditional apprentice robes. Her hair looked like sunshine and her face
was set in her typical expression of a concentrated furrow, one of deep thought, not displeasure. She
hadn’t even noticed him. Quickly he put the book away and darted out into the hallway before she
could get too far, grasping her arm and tugging her into the shadows.
 As ever, she was never startled by him, and met him halfway, clutching the books to her chest with
one arm while the other went around his neck as they kissed.
 “Hello, my lady,” he murmured, kissing her neck, grinning against her skin.
 “Hello, my prince,” she murmured happily, sighing.
 “Jaina,” came a voice, “why are you—”
 They sprang apart guiltily, staring at the intruder. Jaina gasped softly and color sprang to her face.
“Kael…”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 60
 The elf’s face was carefully composed, but anger burned in his eyes, and his jaw was set. “You
dropped a book as you left,” he said, lifting the tome. “I followed you to return it.”
 Jaina glanced up at Arthas, biting her lower lip. He was as startled as she, but he forced an easy
smile. He kept his arm around Jaina as he turned to Kael’thas.
 “That’s very kind of you, Kael,” he said. “Thanks.”
 For a moment, he thought Kael’thas would attack him. Anger and outrage fairly crackled around
the mage. He was powerful, and Arthas knew that he wouldn’t stand a chance. Even so, he kept his
gaze even with the elven prince’s, not backing down an inch. Kael’thas clenched his fists and remained
where he was.
 “Ashamed of her are you, Arthas?” Kael’thas hissed. “Is she only worth your time and attention if no
one knows about her?”
 Arthas’s eyes narrowed. “I had thought to avoid the ravages of the rumor mill,” he said quietly. “You
know how those things work, Kael, don’t you? Someone says something and next thing you know, it’s
believed to be true. I would protect her reputation by—”
 “Protect?” Kael’thas barked the word. “If you cared about her, you would court her openly, proudly.
Any man would.” He looked at Jaina, and the anger was gone, replaced by a fleeting expression of pain.
Then that, too, disappeared. Jaina looked down. “I will leave you two to your…tryst. And do not fear, I
will say nothing.”
 With an angry hiss, he scornfully tossed the book toward Jaina. The tome, likely invaluable, landed
with a thump at Jaina’s feet, and she started at the sound. Then he was gone in a swirl of violet and
gold robes. Jaina let out her breath and laid her head on Arthas’s chest.
 Arthas patted her back gently. “It’s all right, he’s gone now.”
 “I’m sorry. I guess I should have told you.”
 His chest contracted. “Told me what? Jaina—are you and he—”
 “No!” she answered at once, gazing up at him. “No. But—I think he wanted to. I just—he’s a good
man, and a powerful mage. And a prince. But he’s not…” Her voice trailed off.
 “He’s not what?” The words came out sharper than he had intended. Kael was so many things
Arthas wasn’t. Older, more sophisticated, experienced, powerful, and almost impossibly physically
perfect. He felt jealousy growing inside him in a cold, hard knot. If Kael had reappeared at that
moment, Arthas wasn’t so sure he wouldn’t take a swing at him.
 Jaina smiled softly, the furrow in her brow uncreasing. “He’s not you.”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 61
 The icy knot inside him melted like winter retreating before the warmth of spring, and he pulled her
to him and kissed her again.
 Who cared what a stuffy elven prince thought anyway?

 The year unfolded largely without incident. As summer gave way to a crisp fall and then winter,
more complaints rose about the cost of tending to the orc camps, but both Terenas and Arthas
expected such. Arthas continued to train with Uther. The older man was adamant that while training
at arms was important, so was prayer and meditation. “Yes, we must be able to cut down our enemies,”
he said. “But we must also be able to heal our friends and ourselves.”
 Arthas thought about Invincible. His thoughts always drifted to the horse in winter, and Uther’s
comment only reminded him yet again of what he regarded as the one failure in his entire life. If only he
had begun training earlier, the great white stallion would still be alive. He had never revealed to
anyone exactly what had happened on that snowy day. They all believed it was an accident. And it was,
Arthas told himself. He had not deliberately intended to harm Invincible. He loved the horse; he
would sooner have harmed himself. And if he’d begun paladin training earlier, like Varian had done
with sword fighting, he’d have been able to save Invincible. He swore that would not happen again.
He would do whatever was necessary so that he would never be caught unawares and impotent, would
never not be able to make it right.
 The winter passed, as all winters must, and spring came to Tirisfal Glades again. And so did Jaina
Proudmoore, arriving and looking to Arthas as beautiful, fresh, and welcome a sight as the new
blossoms on the awakening trees. She had come to assist him in publicly celebrating Noblegarden, the
major spring celebration in Lordaeron and Stormwind. Arthas found that staying up late the night
before, sipping wine and filling eggs with candy and other treats, was not quite the boring task it
would have been had Jaina not been there with him, her brow furrowed in the endearing fashion he
had come to recognize as hers and hers alone, as she carefully and intently filled the eggs and set them
aside.
 While there was still no public announcement, Arthas and Jaina both knew their parents had
spoken with one another, and there was a tacit agreement that the courtship would be permitted. So it
was that more and more Arthas, beloved already by his people, was sent to represent Lordaeron at
public functions rather than Uther or Terenas. With the passing of time, Uther had increasingly
withdrawn into the spiritual aspect of the Light, and Terenas seemed more than content to not have to
travel.
 “It is exciting when you are young, to travel for days on horseback and sleep under the stars,” he told
Arthas. “When you are my age, though, horseback riding is best left for recreation, and the stars one
can glimpse by looking out the window are quite close enough.”
 Arthas had grinned, diving with pleasure into the new responsibilities. Admiral Proudmoore and
Archmage Antonidas had apparently come to the same conclusions. For more and more often, when
messengers from Dalaran were sent to Capital City, Lady Jaina Proudmoore accompanied them.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 62
 “Come for the Midsummer Fire Festival,” he said suddenly. She looked up at him, holding an egg
carefully in one hand, brushing a lock of golden hair from her face with the other.
 “I can’t. Summer is a very intensive time for the students at Dalaran. Antonidas has already told me
to expect to stay there the whole time.” Regret was in her voice.
 “Then I’ll come visit you for Midsummer, and you can come for Hallow’s End,” Arthas said. She
shook her head and laughed at him.
 “You are persistent, Arthas Menethil. I will try.”
 “No, you’ll come.” He reached across the table, littered with carefully hollowed out, brightly painted
eggs and small candies, and placed his hand over hers.
 She smiled, still a little shy after all this time, her cheeks turning pink.
 She would come.

 There were several smaller festivals leading up to Hallow’s End. One was somber, one was
celebratory, and this one was a bit of both. It was believed to be a time when the barrier between the
living and the dead was thin, and those who had passed on could be sensed by those still alive.
Tradition had it that at the end of the harvest season, before the winds of winter began to blow, that a
straw effigy would be erected right outside the palace. At sunset on the night of the ceremony, it would
be lit on fire. It was an awesome sight—a giant flaming wicker man, burning bright against the
encroaching night. Anyone who wished could approach the fiery effigy, toss a branch into the cracking
flames, and in so doing metaphorically “burn away” anything he did not wish to carry into the quiet,
deep reflection time provided by winter’s enforced inactivity.
 It was a peasant ritual, sprung up from time immemorial. Arthas suspected that few nowadays truly
believed that tossing a branch into a fire would really solve their problems; even fewer believed that
contact with the dead was possible. He certainly didn’t. But it was a popular celebration, and it
brought Jaina back to Lordaeron, and for those reasons, he was looking forward to it.
 He had a little surprise for her in mind.
 It was right after sunset. The crowds had begun gathering in late afternoon. Some had even
brought picnics and made an event out of enjoying the last few days of late autumn among the hills of
Tirisfal. There were guards stationed about, keeping an eye out for the mishaps that often happen
when large numbers of people are gathered in one place, but Arthas really didn’t expect any difficulties.
When he came out of the palace, clad in a tunic, breeches, and cloak of rich autumnal hues, cheers
erupted. He paused and waved at the onlookers, accepting their applause, then turned and extended
his hand to Jaina.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 63
 She looked a little surprised, but smiled, and the cheers now lifted her name to the darkening sky as
well as his. Arthas and Jaina walked down the path to the giant wicker man and stood before it. Arthas
held up a hand for silence.
 “My countrymen, I join you in celebration of this most revered of nights—the night when we
remember those who are no longer with us, and cast aside the things that hold us back. We burn the
effigy of the wicker man as a symbol of the year that is passing, much as the farmers burn the remains of
the harvested fields. The ashes nourish the soil, and this rite nourishes our souls. It is good to see so
many here tonight. I am pleased to be able to offer the distinct honor of lighting the wicker man to
Lady Jaina Proudmoore.”
 Jaina’s eyes went wide. Arthas turned to her, grinning wickedly.
 “She is the daughter of war hero Admiral Daelin Proudmoore, and promises to be a powerful mage
in her own right. As magi are masters of fire, I think it only right that she light our wicker man this
evening. Do you agree?”
 Those assembled roared with delight, as Arthas knew they would. Arthas bowed at Jaina, then
leaned in and whispered, “Give them a show—they’ll love it.”
 Jaina nodded imperceptibly, then turned to the crowd and waved. Their cheering increased. She
tucked a lock of hair behind her ear, briefly revealing her nervousness, then composed her face. She
closed her eyes and lifted her hands, murmuring an incantation.
 Jaina was dressed in fire hues of red, yellow, and orange. As small balls of flame began to materialize
in her hands, glowing faintly at first and then with increasing brightness, she looked to Arthas like fire
itself for a moment. She held the fire in her hands with ease, comfort, and mastery, and he knew that
the days when she had little control over her spells were long gone. She wasn’t going to “become” a
powerful mage; she obviously already was one, in fact if not in title.
 And then she extended both hands. The balls of fire leaped like a bullet fired from a gun, hurtling
toward the enormous straw effigy. It erupted into flame at once, and the onlookers gasped, then broke
into wild applause. Arthas grinned. The wicker man never caught on fire that quickly when an ordinary
brand was touched to its base.
 Jaina opened her eyes at the sound and waved, smiling delightedly. Arthas leaned close and
whispered, “Spectacular, Jaina.”
 “You asked me to give them a show,” she shot back, grinning at him.
 “Indeed I did. But that was almost too good a show. They’re going to demand that you light the
wicker man every year now I’m afraid.”
 She turned to look at him. “Would that be a problem?”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 64
 The light from the blazing fire danced over her, illuminating her lively features, catching the glint of
a gold circlet adorning her head. Arthas caught his breath as he regarded her. She’d always been
attractive to him, and he’d liked her from the moment they’d met. She’d been a friend, a confidant, an
exciting flirtation. But now he couldn’t help but see her, quite literally, in a whole new light.
 It took a moment for him to find his voice. “No,” he said softly. “No, it wouldn’t be a problem at all.”
 They joined the throngs dancing by the fire that night, causing the guards no end of consternation
as they went right down among the populace and shook hands and exchanged greetings. And then
they gave the dutiful guards the slip, losing themselves in the crowd and stealing away unnoticed.
Arthas led her through the back corridors to the private living quarters of the palace. Once they were
almost caught by some servants taking a shortcut to the kitchens, and had to flatten themselves against
the wall and stay perfectly still for several long moments.
 Then they were in Arthas’s rooms. He closed the door, leaned back up against it, and swept her into
his arms, kissing her deeply. But it was she, shy, studious Jaina, who broke the kiss and moved toward
the bed, leading him by the hand, the orange light from the still- blazing wicker man outside dancing
on their skin.
 He followed, almost as in a daze, a dream, as they stood beside the bed, their hands clasped so
tightly Arthas feared her fingers would snap in his grip. “Jaina,” he whispered.
 “Arthas,” she said, the word a whimper, and kissed him again, her hands reaching up to clasp his
face between her hands. He was dizzy with wanting her, and felt suddenly bereft as she drew back.
Her breath was soft and warm on his face as she whispered, “I…are we ready for this?”
 He started to answer flippantly, but he knew what she was really asking. He could not imagine
being more ready to bring this girl the rest of the way into his heart. He had turned down the lovely
Taretha, and she had not been the first he had said no to. Jaina, he knew, was even less experienced
than he in such matters.
 “I am if you are,” he whispered hoarsely, and as he bent to kiss her again, he saw the familiar furrow
of worry cross her brow. I will kiss it away, he vowed, bringing her onto the bed with him. I will make
everything you could ever worry about go away forever.
 Later, when the wicker man had finally burned out and the only light on Jaina’s sleeping form was
the cool blue- white of moonlight, Arthas still lay awake, running his fingers along the curves of her
body and alternately wondering where this would all lead and feeling content to simply be in the
moment.
 He had not tossed in a branch to the wicker man fire, because he had nothing he wished to be rid
of. Nor did he now, he thought, bending forward to kiss her. Jaina awakened with a soft sigh, reaching
for him.
 “No one can seem to deny you anything,” she murmured, repeating the words she had said to him
the day of their first kiss, “least of all me.”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 65
 He clutched her to him then, a sudden cold shivering over him, though he had no idea why. “Don’t
deny me, Jaina. Don’t ever deny me. Please.”
 She looked up at him, eyes glittering in the cool moonlight. “I never would, Arthas. Never.”
 World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 CHAPTER EIGHT
 The palace had never been so cheerily decorated for the Feast of Winter Veil as it was this year.
Muradin, ever a good ambassador of his people, had brought the dwarven tradition to Lordaeron
upon his arrival. Over the years it had increased in popularity, and this year the people seemed to truly
take it to heart.
 The festive tone had been established a few weeks earlier, when Jaina had delighted them so with
her theatrical display of igniting the wicker man. She had been granted permission to stay through the
winter if she so chose, although Dalaran was not far to one who could teleport herself. Something had
changed. It was both subtle and profound. Jaina Proudmoore was starting to be treated as more than
the daughter of the ruler of Kul Tiras, more than a friend.
 She was starting to be treated as a member of the royal family.
 Arthas first realized it when his mother took both Jaina and Calia to be fitted for the formal dresses
fashion required for the Winter Veil Eve ball. Other guests had spent Winter Veil here; Lianne had
never before wanted to coordinate their outfits with her own and that of her daughter.
 Too, Terenas now often requested that Jaina join him and Arthas when they sat to listen to the
peoples’ petitions. She sat on the king’s left, Arthas on his right. In a position nearly equal to the king’s
own son.
 Well, Arthas thought, he supposed that it was the logical conclusion. Wasn’t it? He recalled his
words to Calia years ago: “We each have our duties, I guess. You to marry whomever Father wants,
and me to marry well for the kingdom.”
 Jaina would be good for the kingdom. Jaina, he thought, would be good for him, too.
 So why did the thought make him feel so uneasy?

 They had fresh snow for the night before Winter Veil. Arthas stood looking out of a large window
at Lordamere Lake, frozen over now. The snow had begun falling at dawn, and had stopped about an
hour ago. The sky was black velvet, the stars small icy diamonds against the soft darkness, and
moonlight made everything look still, hushed, and magical.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 66
 A soft hand slipped into his. “Beautiful, isn’t it?” Jaina said quietly. Arthas nodded, not looking at
her. “Plenty of ammunition.”
 “What?”
 “Ammunition,” Jaina repeated. “For snowball fights.”
 He finally turned to her and his breath caught. He’d not been permitted to see the gowns she, Calia,
and his mother would be wearing to the banquet and ball this evening, and he was stunned by her
beauty. Jaina Proudmoore looked like a snow maiden. From shoes that looked to be made of ice, to a
white gown tinged with the palest blue to the circlet of silver that caught the warm glow of the
torchlight, she was heartbreakingly lovely. But she was no ice queen, no statue; she was warm and soft
and alive, her golden hair flowing about her shoulders, her cheeks pink beneath his admiring gaze, her
blue eyes bright with happiness.
 “You’re like…a white candle,” he said. “All white and gold.” He reached for a lock of her hair, twirling
it about his fingers.
 She grinned. “Yes,” she laughed, reaching to touch his own bright locks, “the children will almost
certainly be blond.”
 He froze.
 “Jaina—are you—”
 She chuckled. “No. Not yet. But there’s no reason to think we won’t be able to have children.”
 Children. Again, the word that galvanized him in shock and peculiar distress. She was talking
about the children they would have. His mind galloped into the future, a future with Jaina as his wife,
their children in the palace, his parents gone, himself on the throne, the weight of the crown on his
head. Part of him desperately wanted that. He loved having Jaina by his side, loved holding her in his
arms at night, loved the taste and smell of her, loved her laughter, pure as a bell and sweet as the scent
of roses.
 He loved—
 What if he ruined it?
 Because suddenly he knew that until this moment, it had all been child’s play. He’d thought of Jaina
as a companion, just as she had been since his boyhood, except their games were now of a more adult
nature. But something had suddenly shifted inside him. What if this was real? What if he really was in
love with her, and she with him? What if he was a bad husband, a bad king—what if—
 “I’m not ready,” he blurted.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 67
 Her brow furrowed. “Well, we do not have to have little ones right away.” She squeezed his hand in
what was clearly intended to be a gesture of reassurance.
 Arthas suddenly dropped her hand and took a step backward. Her frown deepened in confusion.
 “Arthas? What’s wrong?”
 “Jaina—we’re too young,” he said, speaking rapidly, his voice rising slightly. “I’m too young. There’s
still—I can’t—I’m not ready.”
 She paled. “You aren’t—I thought—”
 Guilt racked him. She’d asked him this, the night they became lovers. Are you ready for this? she
had whispered. I am if you are, he had replied, and he’d meant it…. He really had thought he’d meant
it….
 Arthas reached out and grabbed her hands, trying desperately to articulate the emotions racing
through him. “I still have so much to learn. So much training to complete. And Father needs me.
Uther’s got so much he needs to teach and—Jaina, we’ve always been friends. You’ve always
understood me so well. Can’t you understand me now? Can’t we still be friends?”
 Her bloodless lips opened but no words came out at first. Her hands were limp in his. Almost
frantically he squeezed them.
 Jaina, please. Please understand—even if I don’t.
 “Of course, Arthas.” Her voice was a monotone. “We’ll always be friends, you and I.”
 Everything, from her posture to her face to her voice, bespoke her pain and her shock. But Arthas
clung instead to her words as a wave of relief, so profound it made his knees weak, swept over him. It
was all going to be just fine. It might upset her now, a little, but surely she’d understand soon. They
knew each other. She’d figure out that he was right, that it was too soon.
 “I mean—this isn’t forever,” he said, feeling the need to explain. “Just for now. You’ve got studying to
do—I’m sure I’ve been a distraction. Antonidas probably resents me.”
 She said nothing.
 “This is for the best. Maybe one day it’ll be different and we can try again. It’s not that I don’t—that
you—”
 He pulled her into his arms and hugged her. She was stiff as stone for a moment, then he felt the
tension leave her and her arms went around him. They stood alone in the hall for a long time, Arthas
resting his cheek against her bright gold hair, the hair that, no doubt, their children would indeed have
been born with. Might still be born with.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 68
 “I don’t want to close the door,” he said quietly. “I just—”
 “It’s all right, Arthas. I understand.”
 He stepped back, his hands on her shoulders, peering into her eyes. “Do you?”
 She laughed slightly. “Honestly? No. But it’s all right. It will be eventually, anyway. I know that.”
 “Jaina, I just want to make sure this is right. For both of us.”
 I don’t want to mess this up. I can’t mess this up.
 She nodded. She took a deep breath and steadied herself, giving him a smile…a real, if hurting,
smile. “Come, Prince Arthas. You need to escort your friend to the ball.”
 Arthas somehow made it through the evening, and so did Jaina, although Terenas kept giving him
strange glances. He didn’t want to tell his father, not yet. It was a strained and unhappy night, and at
one point during a pause in the dancing, Arthas looked out at the blanket of white snow and the moonsilvered lake, and wondered why everything bad seemed to happen in winter.

 Lieutenant General Aedelas Blackmoore didn’t look particularly happy to have this exclusive
audience with King Terenas and Prince Arthas. In fact, he looked like he desperately would like to
slink away unnoticed.
 The years had not been kind to him, neither physically nor in the hand fate had dealt him. Arthas
recalled a handsome, rather dashing military commander who, while doubtless overfond of his drink,
at least seemed able to keep the ravages of it at bay. No longer. Blackmoore’s hair was streaked with
gray, he had put on weight, and his eyes were bloodshot. He was, fortunately, stone- cold sober. Had
he showed up to this meeting intoxicated, Terenas, a firm believer in the need for moderation in all
things, would have refused to see him.
 Blackmoore was here today because he had messed up. Badly. Somehow the man’s prized gladiator
orc, Thrall, had escaped Durnholde in a fire. Blackmoore had tried to keep it quiet and conduct his
search for the orc personally and on a small scale, but a secret as large as a massive green orc could not
be contained forever. Once word had gotten out, rumors flew wildly, of course—it was a rival lord who
had freed the orc, anxious to ensure winning in the rings; it was a jealous mistress, hoping to embarrass
him; it was a clever band of orcs unaffected by the strange lethargy—no, no, it was Orgrim
Doomhammer himself; it was dragons, infiltrating disguised as humans, who lit the place afire with
only their breath.
 Arthas had thought Thrall exciting to watch in combat, but he recalled that even then the thought
had crossed his mind whether it was wise to train and educate an orc. When information had come
that Thrall was on the loose, Terenas had summoned Blackmoore immediately for an accounting.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 69
 “It was bad enough that you thought it a good idea to train an orc to fight in gladiatorial combat,”
Terenas began. “But to train him in military strategy, to teach him to read, to write…I must ask,
Lieutenant General…what in the Light’s name were you thinking?”
 Arthas smothered a grin as Aedelas Blackmoore seemed to physically diminish right in front of his
eyes.
 “You assured me that the funds and materials went directly into stepping up security, and that your
pet orc was securely guarded.” Terenas continued, “And yet somehow, he is out there instead of safely
inside Durnholde. How is that possible?”
 Blackmoore frowned and rallied somewhat. “It is certainly unfortunate that Thrall escaped. I’m sure
you understand how I must feel.”
 It was a hit on Blackmoore’s part; Terenas still smarted from the fact that Doomhammer had
escaped from under his very nose. But it wasn’t a particularly wise hit. Terenas frowned and continued.
 “I hope this isn’t part of some disturbing trend. The money is earned from the labor of the people,
Lieutenant General. It goes toward keeping them safe. Do I need to send along a representative to
ensure that the funds are properly distributed?”
 “No! No, no, that won’t be necessary. I will account for every penny.”
 “Yes,” said Terenas with deceptive mildness, “you will.”
 When Blackmoore finally left, bowing obsequiously the whole way out, Terenas turned to his son.
 “What are your thoughts on the situation? You saw Thrall in action.”
 Arthas nodded. “He wasn’t at all like I had imagined orcs to be. I mean…he was huge. And fought
fiercely. But it was obvious he was also intelligent. And trained.”
 Terenas stroked his beard, thinking. “There are pockets of renegade orcs out there. Some who
might not have this lassitude that the ones we’ve imprisoned have demonstrated. If Thrall were to find
them and teach them what he knows, it could be a very bad thing for us.”
 Arthas sat up straighter. This could be what he’d been looking for. “I’ve been training hard with
Uther.” And he had been. Unable to properly explain to others—and to himself—why he had ended the
relationship with Jaina, he’d thrown himself into his training. He’d fought for hours a day until his body
ached, attempting to sufficiently exhaust himself so that he could get her face out of his mind.
 It had been what he wanted, hadn’t it? She’d taken it well. So why was it he who lay awake at night,
missing her warmth and presence with a pain that bordered on agony? He had even embraced hitherto
despised hours spent in still, silent meditation in an effort to distract himself. Maybe if he focused on
fighting, on learning how to accept and channel and direct the Light, he could get the hell over her.
Over the girl he himself had broken up with.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 70
 “We could go looking for such orcs. Find them before Thrall does.”
 Terenas nodded. “Uther has informed me of your dedication, and he’s been impressed with your
progress.” He reached a decision. “Very well then. Go tell Uther and start preparing. It’s time for your
first taste of real battle.”
 Arthas was hard put not to let out a whoop of excitement. He refrained, even in his delight picking
up on the pained, worried look on his father’s face. Maybe, just maybe, killing rebellious greenskins
would erase the memory of Jaina’s stricken expression when he’d ended their relationship.
 “Thank you, sir. I’ll do you proud.”
 Despite the regret in his father’s blue- green eyes, so like Arthas’s own, Terenas smiled. “That, my
son, is the least of my worries.”
 World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 CHAPTER NINE
 Jaina raced through the gardens, late to her meeting with Archmage Antonidas. She’d done it again
—lost track of time with her nose buried in a book. Her master was always chiding her about that, but
she couldn’t help it. Her slippered feet took her down between the rows of goldenbark apple trees, the
fruit hanging heavy and ripe. She felt a brief brush of sorrow as she remembered a conversation held
here only a few short years ago—when Arthas had appeared behind her, slipping his hands over her
eyes, and whispering, “Guess who?”
 Arthas. She missed him still. She supposed she always would. The breakup had been unexpected
and hurtful, and the timing couldn’t have been worse—she still cringed as she thought about having to
continue through the formal Winter Veil ball as if nothing had gone wrong—but as the initial shock
had faded she had grown to understand his reasoning. They were both young yet and, as he had
pointed out at the time, they had responsibilities and training to complete. She’d promised him they’d
always stay friends, and she had meant it, then and afterward. In order for her to keep that promise, she
had had to heal. And so she had done.
 Certainly much had happened in those few short years to keep her busy and focused elsewhere. Five
years ago, a powerful wizard named Kel’Thuzad had drawn the ire of the Kirin Tor with his dabbling
in unnatural necromantic magic. He had left, suddenly and mysteriously, after being severely
reprimanded and told in no uncertain terms to cease his experiments immediately. The mystery had
been one of many things that had helped distract her over the last three years.
 Outside the gates of the magical city, things had happened too, though information was scattered,
rumor- ridden, and chaotic. As best Jaina had been able to determine, the escaped orc Thrall, now
calling himself the warchief of the new Horde, had begun attacking the internment camps and freeing
the captive orcs. Later, Durnholde itself had been razed by this self- styled warchief, crumbling into
ruins as Thrall called forth what Jaina had learned was the ancient shamanistic magic of his people.
Blackmoore had fallen too, but by all accounts, he would not be mourned overlong. While troubled at
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 71
what this new Horde might eventually mean for her people, Jaina could not find it in herself to mourn
the loss of the camps. Not after what she had seen of them.
 Voices reached her ears, one raised in anger. So unusual was that in this place that Jaina slid to an
abrupt halt.
 “As I told Terenas, your people are prisoners in their own lands. I repeat to you now—humanity is
in peril. The tides of darkness have come again, and the whole world is poised upon the brink of war!”
The voice was male, resonant and strong, and Jaina did not recognize it.
 “Ah, now I know who you must be. You are the rambling prophet who was the subject of King
Terenas’s last letter. And I am no more interested in your babble than he is.” The other speaker was
Antonidas, as calm as the stranger was insistent. Jaina knew that she should discreetly withdraw before
she was noticed, but the same curiosity that had driven the girl she had been to go along with Arthas to
spy on the orc encampments now prompted her to cloak herself in invisibility and learn more. She
moved closer as quietly as possible. She could see them both now; the first speaker, whom Antonidas
had sarcastically referred to as a “prophet,” clad in a cloak and hood decorated with black feathers, and
her master on horseback. “I thought Terenas was quite plain in his opinion of your predictions.”
 “You must be wiser than the king! The end is near!”
 “I told you before, I’m not interested in this nonsense.” Clipped, calm, dismissive. Jaina knew that
tone of voice.
 The prophet was silent for a moment, then he sighed. “Then I’ve wasted my time here.”
 Before Jaina’s startled gaze, the stranger’s shape blurred. It compressed and shifted, and where an
instant before a man in a cowled robe had stood, now there was only a large black bird. With a caw of
frustration, it sprang skyward, flapping its wings, and was gone.
 His eyes still on the interloper, now a vanishing dot in the blue sky, Antonidas said, “You can show
yourself now, Jaina.”
 Heat washed over Jaina’s face. She murmured a counterspell and edged forward. “I’m sorry for
eavesdropping, Master, but—”
 “It’s your inquisitive nature that I’ve come to rely on, child,” Antonidas said, chuckling a little. “That
crazed fool’s convinced that the world’s about to end. That’s taking the whole ‘plague’ thing a bit far, in
my opinion.”
 “Plague?” Jaina started.
 Antonidas sighed and dismounted, sending his steed off with an amiable slap to the rear. The horse
pranced a little, then trotted obediently off to the stables, where a groom would attend to him. The
archmage beckoned to his apprentice, who stepped forward and took the outstretched, gnarled hand.
“You will recall I sent some messengers to Capital City a short time ago.”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 72
 “I thought that was regarding the orc situtation.” Antonidas murmured an incantation, and a few
moments later they appeared in his private quarters. Jaina loved this place; loved the untidiness, the
smell of parchment and leather and ink, and the old chairs into which one could curl and lose oneself in
knowledge. He gestured for her to sit and with the crook of a finger had a pitcher pour nectar for them.
 “Well, that was on the agenda, yes, but my representatives thought that a more dire threat was at
our doorstep.”
 “More dire than the Horde re- forming?” Jaina extended her hand, and the crystal goblet, filled with
golden liquid, floated into her palm.
 “Orcs, potentially, could be reasoned with. Disease cannot. There are reports of a plague spreading
in the northlands. Something I think the Kirin Tor should be paying close attention to.”
 Jaina peered at him, her brow furrowing as she sipped. Generally disease fell under the auspices of
the priests, not magi. Unless—
 “You think it’s magical in nature somehow?”
 He nodded his bald head. “It’s a strong possibility. And that’s why, Jaina Proudmoore, I am asking
you to travel to these lands and investigate the matter.”
 Jaina nearly choked on her nectar. “Me?”
 He smiled gently. “You. You have learned nearly everything I have to teach. It’s time you utilized
those skills outside of the safety of these towers.” His eyes twinkled again. “And I have arranged for a
special envoy to assist you.”

 Arthas lounged against a tree, turning his face up to the weak sunlight and closing his eyes. He
knew he radiated calmness and confidence; he had to. His men were worrying enough for all of them.
He couldn’t let them see that he, too, was anxious. After all this time…how would they get along?
Maybe it hadn’t been so smart a decision after all. But all the reports had been glowing, and he knew
she had the most level of heads. It would work out all right. It had to.
 One of his captains, Falric, whom Arthas had known for years, stomped about, going a little way
down one of the four paths at this crossroads, then returning to venture a short distance down another.
His breath was visible in the chill, and his irritation was obviously growing by the minute. “Prince
Arthas,” he finally ventured, “we’ve been waiting here for hours. Are you sure this friend of yours is
coming?”
 Arthas’s lips curved in a slight smile as he answered without opening his eyes. The men had not
been told, for reasons of security. “I’m sure.” He was. He thought about all the other times he had
patiently waited for her. “Jaina usually runs a little late.”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 73
 No sooner had the words left his lips than he heard a distant bellow and the barely decipherable
words, “Me SMASH!”
 Like a panther dozing in the sun only to waken instantly alert, Arthas sprang to attention, hammer
in hand. He started down the road, to see a slender, feminine shape racing toward him as she crested
the hill into his vision. Behind her loomed what he knew to be an elemental—a swirling blob of aquacolored water, with a crude head and limbs.
 And behind that…were two ogres.
 “By the Light!” cried Falric, starting to race forward. Arthas would have beaten him to the girl
except for the fact that right at that moment, he caught sight of Jaina Proudmoore’s face.
 She was grinning.
 “Stay your blade, Captain,” Arthas said, feeling his own lips curve into a grin. “She can take care of
herself.”
 And so indeed the lady could—and efficiently. At that precise moment Jaina wheeled and began to
summon fire. Arthas realized that if he was going to feel sorry for anyone in this conflict, it was the poor
baffled ogres, bellowing in pain as fire licked their pudgy, pale forms and staring in shock at the tiny
human female responsible for such astonishing agony. One of them had the sense to run, but the other,
seemingly unable to believe it, kept coming. Jaina sent a blast of rumbling orange flame at it again, and
it cried out and collapsed, burning to death quickly, the rank scent of charred flesh filling Arthas’s
nostrils.
 Jaina watched the second one flee, dusted her hands off, and nodded. She hadn’t even broken a
sweat.
 “Gentlemen, meet Miss Jaina Proudmoore,” Arthas drawled, walking up to his childhood friend
and former lover. “Special agent to the Kirin Tor, and one of the most talented sorceresses in the land.
Looks like you haven’t lost your touch.”
 She turned to face him, smiling up at him. There was no awkwardness in this moment, only
happiness. She was glad to see him, and he her, the pleasure swelling inside him. “It’s good to see you
again.”
 So much in so few, almost formal words. But she understood him. She had always understood him.
Her eyes were sparkling as she replied, “You, too. It’s been a while since a prince escorted me
anywhere.”
 “Yes,” he said, a slight hint of ruefulness coloring his tone. “It has.” Now it was awkward, and Jaina
looked down and he cleared his throat. “Well, I guess we should get under way.”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 74
 She nodded, dismissing the elemental with a wave of her hand. “I don’t need this fellow with such
stalwart soldiers,” she said, gifting Falric and his men with one of her best smiles. “So, Your Highness,
what do you know about this plague we’re to investigate?”
 “Not much,” Arthas was forced to confess as they fell into step. “Father just now sent me to work
with you. Uther’s been fighting with me against the orcs most recently. But I’d guess that if the
Dalaran wizards want to find out more about it, it’s got something to do with magic.”
 She nodded, still smiling, although her brow was starting to furrow in that familiar fashion. Arthas
felt an odd pang as he noticed it. “Quite right. Although exactly how, I’m not sure. That’s why Master
Antonidas sent me to observe and report back. We should check out the villages along the King’s road.
Talk to the inhabitants—see if they know anything useful. Hopefully they have not been infected and
this is nothing more serious than a localized outbreak of some sort.”
 He, who knew her so well, could hear the doubt in her voice. He understood it. If Antonidas really
believed it wasn’t serious, he wouldn’t have sent his prized apprentice to check it out—nor would King
Terenas have sent his son.
 He changed the topic. “I wonder if it had anything to do with the orcs.” At her raised eyebrow, he
continued. “I’m sure you’ve heard about the escapes from the internment camps.”
 She nodded. “Yes. I sometimes wonder if that little family we saw was among those who escaped.”
 He shifted uneasily. “Well, if they are, they might still be worshipping demons.”
 Her eyes widened. “What? I thought that was stamped out long ago—that the orcs were no longer
using demonic energy.”
 Arthas shrugged. “Father sent Uther and me to help defend Strahnbrad. By the time I got there,
orcs had already begun kidnapping villagers. We hunted them down at their encampment, but three
men were…sacrificed.”
 Jaina was listening now as she always did, not just with her ears but with her whole body,
concentrating on every word with the focus that he remembered. Light, but she was beautiful.
 “The orcs said they were offering them up to their demons. Called it a paltry sacrifice—clearly they
wanted more.”
 “And Antonidas seems to think this plague is magical in nature,” Jaina murmured. “I wonder if there
is a connection. It’s disheartening to hear that they have reverted so. Perhaps it is only a single clan.”
 “Perhaps—or perhaps not.” He recalled how Thrall had fought in the ring, recalled how even those
ragtag orcs had put up a surprisingly good fight. “We can’t afford to take risks. If we’re attacked, my
men have standing orders to kill them all.” Briefly, he thought about the fury that raged in him when
the orc leader had sent back his response to Uther’s offer of surrender. The two men who had been
sent in to parley had been killed, their horses returning riderless in a wordless, brutal message.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 75
 “Let’s get in there and destroy the beasts!” he’d cried, the weapon he had been given at his initiation
into the Silver Hand glowing brightly. He would have charged in immediately had not Uther placed a
restraining hand on his arm.
 “Remember, Arthas,” he had said, his voice calm, “we are paladins. Vengeance cannot be a part of
what we must do. If we allow our passions to turn to bloodlust, then we will become as vile as the
orcs.”
 The words penetrated the anger—somewhat. Arthas had clenched his teeth, watching as the
frightened horses, their riders butchered, were led away. Uther’s words were wisdom, but Arthas felt
he had failed the men who’d been on those horses. Failed them, just as he’d failed Invincible, and now
they were as dead as that great beast. He took a deep, steadying breath. “Yes, Uther.”
 His calmness had been rewarded—Uther had charged him with leading the attack. If only he’d
been in time to save those three poor men.
 A gentle hand on his arm called him back to the present, and without thinking, out of old habit, he
covered Jaina’s hand with his own. She started to pull away, then gave him a slightly strained smile.
 “It’s so very, very good to see you again,” he said impulsively.
 Her smile softened, became genuine, and she squeezed his arm. “You, too, Your Highness. By the
way, thanks for holding your man back when we met.” The smile became a full- fledged grin. “I told you
once before, I’m not a fragile little figurine.”
 He chuckled. “Indeed not, my lady. You will fight alongside us in these battles.”
 She sighed. “I pray there is no fighting—only investigating. But I will do what I must. I always
have.”
 Jaina withdrew her hand. Arthas hid his disappointment. “As we all do, my lady.”
 “Oh stop that. I’m Jaina.”
 “And I’m Arthas. Nice to meet you.”
 She shoved him then, and they laughed, and suddenly a barrier was gone between them. His heart
warmed as he looked down at her, at his side once again. They were facing real danger together for the
first time. He was conflicted. He wanted to keep her safe, but he also wanted to let her shine in her
abilities. Had he done the right thing? Was it too late? He’d told her that he wasn’t ready, and that had
been true—he hadn’t been ready for a lot of things then. But much had changed since that Winter Veil.
And some things hadn’t changed at all. All kinds of emotions tore at him, and he pushed them all away
except one: simple pleasure in her presence.
 They made camp that night before dusk, in a small clearing close to the road. There was no
moonlight, only the stars, glittering in the ebony darkness above them. Jaina jokingly lit the fire,
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 76
conjured some delicious breads and beverages, then declared, “I’m done.” The men laughed and
obligingly prepared the rest of the meal, skewering rabbits over spits and unpacking fruits. Wine was
passed around, and the feeling was almost more of a group of comrades enjoying the evening than a
battle- ready unit investigating a deadly plague.
 Afterward, Jaina sat a little bit away from the group. Her eyes were on the skies, a smile playing on
her lips. Arthas joined her and offered her more wine. She held out her goblet while he poured and
then took a sip.
 “This is a lovely vintage, Your H—Arthas,” she said.
 “One of the benefits of being a prince,” he replied. He stretched out his long legs and lay down next
to her, one arm behind his head as a pillow, the other arm holding the goblet steady on his chest as he
looked up at the stars. “What do you think we’re going to find?”
 “I don’t know. I was sent as an investigator. I do wonder if it doesn’t have something to do with
demons, though, given your encounter with the orcs.”
 He nodded in the darkness, then, realizing she couldn’t see him, said, “I agree. I wonder if we
shouldn’t have brought a priest along with us now.”
 She turned to smile at him. “You’re a paladin, Arthas. The Light works through you. Plus, you
swing a weapon better than any priest I’ve seen.”
 He grinned at that. The moment hung between them, and just as he started to reach out a hand to
her, she sighed and got to her feet, finishing the wine.
 “It’s late. I don’t know about you, but I’m exhausted. I’ll see you in the morning. Sleep well, Arthas.”
 But he couldn’t sleep. He tossed and turned in his bedroll, staring up at the sky, the night sounds
contriving to catch his attention even when he did start to drift off. He could take it no more. He’d
always been impulsive, and he knew it, but dammit—
 He threw back the blankets and sat up. The camp was still. They were in no danger here, so there
was no one set to watch. Quietly, Arthas rose and went to the area where he knew Jaina was sleeping.
He knelt down beside her and brushed her hair back from her face.
 “Jaina,” he whispered, “wake up.”
 As she had done that night so long ago, she again awoke in silence and unafraid, blinking up at him
curiously.
 He grinned. “You up for an adventure?”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 77
 She tilted her head, smiling, the memories obviously coming back to her as well. “What sort of an
adventure?” she countered.
 “Trust me.”
 “I always have, Arthas.”
 They spoke in whispers, their breath visible in the cold night air. She was propped up on one elbow
now, and he imitated her, reaching with his other hand to touch her face. She did not pull back.
 “Jaina…I think there was a reason we were brought together again.”
 There it was, the little furrow in her brow. “Of course. Your father sent you because—”
 “No, no. More than that. We’re working together as a team now. We—we work well that way.”
 She was very still. He continued to caress the smooth curve of her cheek.
 “I—when this is all over—maybe we can…talk. You know.”
 “About what ended at Winter Veil?”
 “No. Not about endings. About beginnings. Because things have felt very incomplete to me
without you. You know me like no one else does, Jaina, and I’ve missed that.”
 She was silent for a long moment, then sighed softly and leaned her cheek into his hand. He
shivered as she turned her head and kissed his palm.
 “I have never been able to deny you, Arthas,” she said, a hint of laughter in her voice. “And yes. It
feels incomplete to me, too. I’ve missed you very much.”
 Relief washed over him and he leaned forward, wrapping her in his arms and kissing her
passionately. They would get to the bottom of this mystery together, solve it, and come home heroes.
Then they’d get married—maybe in the spring. He wanted to see her showered with rose petals. And
later there’d be those fair- haired children Jaina had talked about.
 They were not intimate, not here, surrounded as they were by Arthas’s men, but he did join her
under the blankets until the steely dawn called him reluctantly back to his own bed. Before he left,
though, he caught her in his arms and held her tightly.
 He did sleep a little then, secure in the knowledge that nothing—no plague, no demon, no mystery
could stand up to the joined efforts of Prince Arthas Menethil, paladin of the Light, and Lady Jaina
Proudmoore, mage. They’d see it through together—whatever it took.
 World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 78
 CHAPTER TEN
 By mid- morning the next day, they were starting to come across scattered farmsteads. “The village
isn’t too far distant,” Arthas said, consulting the map. “None of these farms is mentioned here.”
 “Nay,” said Falric firmly. There was a degree of familiarity in how he spoke to his prince due to how
long the two had known each other. Arthas had come to rely on the man’s forthrightness, and Falric
had been first on the list of those he wanted to accompany him. Now Falric shook his graying head. “I
grew up in this area, sir, and most of these farmers are the independent sort. They bring their produce
and livestock in to the villages, sell it, and come home.”
 “Bad blood?”
 “Not at all, Your Highness. It’s just the way things are done.”
 “If that is the relationship,” Jaina said, “then if someone fell ill, they might not summon outside aid.
These people could be sick.”
 “Jaina raises a good point. Let’s go see what we can find out from these farmers,” Arthas ordered,
clucking to his mount. They approached slowly, giving the farmers time to notice and prepare for
them. If they were isolationists and if the plague had indeed cut a swathe through here, the farmers
would be wary of large parties sweeping down on them.
 Arthas’s eyes scanned the area as they approached the farmhouse. “Look,” he said, pointing. “The
gate’s been smashed and the livestock is gone.”
 “That’s not a good sign,” Jaina muttered.
 “Nor has anyone come out to greet us,” Falric said. “Or even to challenge us.”
 Arthas and Jaina exchanged glances. Arthas signaled the group to halt.
 “Greetings to you all!” he said in a strong voice. “I am Arthas, prince of Lordaeron, and my men and
I mean you no harm. Please, come out and speak with us—we have questions concerning your safety.”
 Silence. The wind picked up, flattening the acres of grass that should have been grazing ground for
cattle or sheep. The only sound was its soft sigh and the creaking of their own armor as they all shifted
uneasily.
 “No one’s here,” Arthas said.
 “Or maybe they’re too sick to come out,” Jaina replied. “Arthas, we must at least go and see. They
could need our help!”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 79
 Arthas glanced at his men. They looked none too keen on walking into a house that might be
infested with plague victims, nor in truth was he. But Jaina was right. These were his people. He had
vowed to help them. And so he would, wherever that promise led, whatever it took.
 “Come on,” he said, and swung down. Beside him Jaina did the same. “No, you stay here.”
 Her golden brows drew together in a frown. “I told you, I’m not a fragile little figurine, Arthas. I
was sent to investigate the plague, and if there are indeed victims here, I need to see them for myself.”
 He sighed and nodded. “All right then.”
 He strode forward to the farmhouse. They were almost at the garden when the wind shifted.
 The stench was horrific. Jaina covered her mouth and even Arthas struggled not to gag. It was the
sickly sweet smell of the slaughterhouse—no, not even that fresh; it was the reek of carrion. One of his
men turned and vomited. It was by sheer will that Arthas did not emulate him. The foul odor was
coming from inside the house. It was by now obvious what had happened to the inhabitants.
 Jaina turned to him, pale but resolute. “I have to examine—”
 Horrible, liquid- sounding cries filled the air along with the stench of death as from inside the
farmhouse and behind it things came at them with startling speed. Arthas’s hammer suddenly began to
glow with a light so bright he had to narrow his eyes against it. He whirled, lifting the hammer, and
stared straight into the eye sockets of a walking nightmare.
 It wore a rough shirt and overalls, and its weapon was a pitchfork. Once, it had been a farmer. But
that had been back when it had been alive. It was obviously dead now, the gray- green flesh sloughing
off its skeleton, its rotting fingers leaving smudged bits on the pitchfork handle. Black, congealed fluids
oozed from pustules and its gurgling roar spat flecks of ichor on Arthas’s unprotected face. So shocked
was he by the apparition that he barely had time to swing the hammer before it jabbed him with the
pitchfork. He got his blessed weapon up just in time, knocking the farming implement from the hands
of the walking dead man and bringing the radiant hammer crashing into its torso. The thing went
sprawling and did not rise.
 But others came to take its place. Arthas heard the fwhump and telltale crackling of Jaina’s firebolts
and then suddenly another smell was added to the sickly miasma—the odor of burning flesh. All
around him he heard the sound of weapons clashing, men screaming battle cries, the crackle of flame.
One of the corpses stumbled distractedly into the house, its body and clothing ablaze. A few moments
later, smoke began to billow from the open door.
 That was it—
 “Everyone get out, now!” Arthas cried. “Jaina! Burn the farmhouse! Burn it to the ground!”
 Despite the horror and panic that was racing through his men—trained soldiers, all of them, but not
trained for this—his orders were heard. The men turned and ran from the house. Arthas looked over at
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 80
Jaina. Her mouth was set in a grim line, her eyes were fastened on the house, and fire crackled as
comfortably in her small hands as if the flames were innocuous as flowers.
 A huge fireball as big as a man exploded into the house. It burst into flame and Arthas lifted his
hand to shield his face from the blast. Several of the animated corpses had been trapped inside. For a
moment Arthas stared at the conflagration, unable to tear his eyes from it, then he forced himself to
turn his attention to slaughtering those that had not been caught in the pyre. It was the work of a few
more moments, and then all the things were dead. Really dead this time.
 For a long moment, there was silence except for the crackling sound of flames consuming the
burning house. With a slow sigh, the building collapsed. Arthas was glad he could not see the corpses
as they were turned to ash.
 He caught his breath and turned to Jaina. “What…”
 She swallowed hard. Her face was black with soot, save where streams of sweat had cleared a path.
“They—they are called undead.”
 “Light preserve us,” Falric muttered, his eyes bulging and his face pale. “I’d thought things like this
were just stories to scare children.”
 “No, they’re real enough all right. I just—I’ve never seen one. Never expected to. The, ah…” She
took a deep breath and calmed herself, getting her voice under control. “The dead sometimes do linger
on, if their deaths were traumatic. It’s what gave rise to ghost stories.”
 Her demeanor was calming after the horror. Arthas noticed his men turning to listen to her, eager
for some understanding of what the hell had just happened to them. He, too, was more grateful for her
book learning than he could ever recall being before.
 “The…the animation of corpses by powerful individual necromancers is not unheard of. We saw
examples of this in both the First War, when the orcs were able to animate skeletal remains, and in the
Second, with the appearance of what would come to be known as death knights,” Jaina went on, as if
she were reciting a passage rather than trying to explain a horror that the mind could barely grasp. “But
as I say—I’ve never seen any of them before.”
 “Well, they’re really dead now,” one of the men said. Arthas gave him an encouraging smile.
 “We have your swords, the Light, and the Lady Jaina’s fire to thank for that,” he told them.
 “Arthas,” Jaina said. “A moment?”
 They walked away a little bit while the men began to clean themselves up and recover from the
unnerving encounter. “I think I know what you’re going to say,” Arthas began. “You were sent here to
see if this plague was magical in nature. And it’s starting to look like it is. Necromantic magic.”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 81
 Jaina nodded wordlessly. Arthas glanced over at his men. “We haven’t even hit the main villages yet.
I have a feeling we’re going to see more of these…undead.”
 Jaina grimaced. “I have a feeling you’re right.”
 As they departed the cluster of farmsteads, Jaina drew her horse up and paused.
 “What are you looking at?” Arthas stepped beside her. Jaina pointed. He followed her gaze, to see a
silo standing alone on a hill. “The granary?”
 She shook her head. “No…the land around it.” She dismounted, knelt and touched the soil,
scooping up a handful of dry dirt and dead grass. She examined it, poking at a small insect, its six legs
curled up in death, then sifted the dirt through her fingers as the slight wind took the powdery soil and
bore it away in a little puff of dust. “It’s as if the land around that granary is…dying.”
 Arthas glanced from her hand to the earth. She was completely right, he realized. Several yards
behind him, the grass was green and healthy, the soil presumably still rich and fertile. But beneath his
feet and in the area around the granary, it was as dead as if it were the middle of winter. No—that
wasn’t a good analogy—winter was when the land slept. There was still life in it, dormant, but ready to
be awakened when spring came.
 There was no life here.
 He stared at the granary, sea- green eyes narrowing. “What could have caused this?”
 “I’m not sure. It reminds me of what happened with the Dark Portal and the Blasted Lands. When
the portal was opened, the demonic energies that sapped the life from Draenor spilled through into
Azeroth. And the land around the portal—”
 “…died,” Arthas finished. A thought struck him. “Jaina—could the grain itself be plagued? Carrying
this—this demonic energy?”
 Her eyes widened. “Let’s hope not.” She pointed at the crates the men were hauling out of the
granary. “Those crates bear the regional seal of Andorhal, the distribution center for the northern
boroughs. If this grain can spread the plague, there’s no telling how many villages might be infected.”
 She almost whispered the words, looking wan and sick. He stared at her hands, pale with the dust
of the dead land. Fear suddenly shot through Arthas and he grabbed her hand. Closing his eyes, he
murmured a prayer. Warm light filled him, spread from his hand to hers. Jaina glanced at him,
confused, then down at her own hand clasped in his gloved one. Her eyes widened with horror at what
she only now realized could have been a very narrow escape.
 “Thank you,” she whispered.
 He gave her a shaky grin, then called out to his men, “Gloves! Every man here wears gloves in this
area! No exceptions!”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 82
 His captain heard him and nodded, repeating the order. Most of the men were in full armor, and so
were already wearing gauntlets. Arthas shook his head, dispelling the worry that still clung to him. He
had sensed no sickness in Jaina at all.
 Thank the Light.
 He pressed her hand to his lips. Jaina, moved, blushed and smiled softly. “That was foolish of me. I
wasn’t thinking.”
 “Lucky for you I was.”
 “A reversal of our roles,” she said wryly, offering him a grin and kiss to take the sting out of the gibe.

 Their mission was now clear—to find and destroy any infected granaries they could. Their task was
aided the following day when Arthas’s troops crossed paths with a pair of quel’dorei priests. They, too,
had begun to sense the wrongness that was starting to creep through the land, and had come to offer
what healing they could. They offered more tangible help as well—they were able to direct Arthas
toward a warehouse at the far end of the village they were approaching.
 “There are some houses up ahead, sir,” Falric said.
 “Well, then,” Arthas said, “let’s—
 A sudden boom took him completely by surprise and his horse reared, spooked. “What the—?” He
looked in the direction from which the sounds had come. Small shapes, barely visible, but there was no
mistaking the noise. “That’s mortar fire. Come on!” He regained control of his horse, yanked its head
around and galloped toward the sound.
 Several dwarves looked up as they approached, as surprised to see Arthas as he was to see them. He
wheeled to a halt. “What the hell are you shooting at?”
 “We’re blasting those damned skeletons. This whole flaming village is crawling with them!”
 A chill ran up Arthas’s spine. He could see them now, the by- now- too- familiar figures of undead
shuffling with their unmistakable gait closing the distance. “Fire!” cried the leader of the dwarves, and
several skeletons were blown into bones that flew in several directions.
 “Well, I could use your help,” Arthas said. “We’ve got a warehouse to destroy at the end of town.”
 The dwarf turned to him, brown eyes wide. “A warehouse?” he echoed in disbelief. “We’re being set
upon by tha walkin’ dead and ye’re fretting about a warehouse?”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 83
 Arthas had no time for this. “What’s in the warehouse is killing these people,” he snapped, pointing
at the remains of the skeletons. “And when they die…”
 The dwarf’s eyes widened. “Och, I ken ye now. Lads! Move up. We’re tae be helping this bonny
boy’s troops!” He peered up at Arthas. “By the way, who exactly are ye, bonny boy?”
 Even in the midst of the horror, the offhanded nature of the question made Arthas grin. “Prince
Arthas Menethil. And you are?”
 The dwarf gaped for just an instant, then quickly recovered. “Dargal, at yer service, Yer Highness.”
 Arthas did not waste further breath on pleasantries, instead attempting to calm his steed sufficiently
to keep up with the now- moving unit. The horse was a charger, bred for battle, and while it had not
given him a moment’s trouble while he was fighting orcs, it clearly did not like the scent of the undead
in its nostrils. He couldn’t blame it, but its skittishness made him think of Invincible’s great heart and
utter lack of fear. He forced the thought away; it was a distraction. He needed to focus, not mourn a
beast even more surely dead than the lumbering corpses that were being blown to bits.
 Jaina and his men fell in behind him, catching those who weren’t quite destroyed by mortar fire and
those who stumbled in from the sides and behind him. Energy filled him, flowed through him, as he
swung his hammer tirelessly. He was grateful for Dargal’s timely arrival. There were so very many of
these undead things, he was not sure his troops could handle them all.
 The combined units of humans and dwarves made slow but inexorable progression toward the
granary. The undead came more thickly as they approached, and by the time they saw silos looming in
the distance, there were still more. He leaped from his unhappy mount and charged into their midst,
gripping his hammer that glowed with the power of the Light. Now that the initial shock and horror
had passed, Arthas found that slaughtering these monstrosities was even better than killing orcs.
Maybe the orcs, as Jaina had said, were indeed people—were individuals. These things were nothing
more than corpses, jerking around like marionettes, activated by some twisted necromantic puppeteer.
They fell like puppets with the strings cut too and he smiled fiercely as two undead toppled from the
same broad, sweeping blow of the mighty weapon.
 These had been dead longer, it seemed; the stench around them was not so ripe, and the bodies
were almost more mummified than decaying. Several of them, like those of the first wave, were nothing
more than skeletons, bits of clothing or makeshift armor on their bony frames as they rattled toward
Arthas and his men.
 The acrid odor of burning flesh assaulted his nostrils and he grinned, grateful again for Jaina’s
presence, and he still fought on. He glanced about, panting. Thus far he had lost not a single man, and
Jaina, though pale with exertion, was unharmed.
 “Arthas!” Jaina’s voice, strong and clear, pierced through the din. Arthas dispatched the carcass that
was attempting to decapitate him with a scythe and in the brief pause that afforded him glanced at her.
She was pointing up ahead, preparatory fire already glowing in her palms and limning her fingers.
“Look!”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 84
 He turned his gaze to where she was pointing and his eyes narrowed. Up ahead was a cluster of
humans—obviously living humans judging by their movements—clad in black. They were gesturing—
casting, or pointing—clearly directing the movements of the waves of undead that were being hurled at
them now.
 “Over there! Target them!” Arthas cried.
 The cannons were swung around and his men charged, hacking their way through the undead,
their eyes fixed upon the living men in black robes. We’ve got you now, Arthas thought with savage
delight.
 But as soon as they came under fire directly, the men ceased their activities. The undead they had
been controlling suddenly halted, still animated, but no longer directed. They were easy marks for the
dwarven mortar fire and Arthas’s men, who cut them down with single blows and pushed forward.
The magi gathered together and a few of them began casting, their hands fluttering, and Arthas
recognized the familiar image of whirling space that indicated they were attempting to create a portal.
 “No! Don’t let them escape!” he cried, slamming his hammer into the chest of a skeleton, bringing it
back around in an arc to cave in the head of a shuffling zombie. From the Light only knew where, the
wizards summoned more of the walking dead—skeletons, rotting corpses, and something that was
huge and pale and had altogether too many limbs. Across its maggoty- white, glistening torso it
sported stitches as wide as Arthas’s hand, looking like a disturbed child’s idea of a rag doll. It towered
above the others, ghastly weapons clutched in its three hands, and fixed Arthas with a single working
eye.
 Jaina had somehow appeared by his side and cried, “By the Light—that creature looks like it was
sewn together from different corpses!”
 “Let’s study it after we kill it, okay?” Arthas shot back, and charged. The abominable experiment
approached, uttering guttural noises and swinging an axe as big as Arthas was tall. He leaped out of
the way, rolling and springing lightly back up on his feet to charge the monstrosity from behind. Three
of his men, two with polearms, did the same, and the hideous thing was quickly dispatched. Even as he
battled fiercely, he watched the magi out of the corner of his eye as they turned and rushed through
their portal. And then they were gone. The undead they had abandoned all stopped in their tracks,
undirected corpses that were quickly destroyed.
 “Dammit!” Arthas cried. A hand fell on his arm and he jerked it back, his features softening slightly
as he saw it was Jaina. He wasn’t in the mood for comforting or explanations, and he had to do
something, anything, to compensate for the men in black robes vanishing on him. “Destroy that
warehouse, now!”
 “Aye, Yer Highness! Let’s go lads!” The dwarves surged forward, as eager as he to seize some kind
of victory. The cannons rolled over the dead men and the dead soil, until they were within range.
 “Fire!” Dargal cried. As one, the cannons roared, and Arthas felt a hot surge of pleasure as the
granary crumbled beneath the assault.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 85
 “Jaina! Burn what’s left of it!” She was already lifting her hands before he started speaking; they did
work well together, he thought. An enormous ball of crackling flame sprang from her hands, and the
granary and its contents ignited immediately. They waited, watching it burn, so that the fire did not
spread. With the land so desiccated, a fire could quickly get out of control.
 Arthas ran a hand through his sweat- stiff blond hair. The heat coming off the burning granary was
oppressive and he yearned for a breeze. He walked away a short distance, and prodded the fallen pale
thing with a plated boot. His foot sank into the soft flesh and he wrinkled his nose. Jaina followed him.
Upon closer examination, it looked like she had been right—that the thing was indeed cobbled
together out of other body parts.
 Arthas suppressed a shudder. “The magi—dressed in black…”
 “I—I’m afraid they were necromancers,” Jaina said. “Just like we discussed earlier.”
 “What noo?” Dargal had come up behind them and was eyeing the fallen abomination with disgust
on his face.
 “Necromancers. Magi who have dabbled in dark magic—who can raise and control the dead.
Obviously, they and whomever they serve are behind this plague.” She lifted her serious blue eyes to
Arthas. “Demonic energy may be involved, but I think it’s clear that we started down the wrong path.”
 “Necromancers…creating a plague to get more raw material for their unholy army,” Arthas
murmured, glancing back toward the now- smoking ruins of the granary. “I want them. No—no, I
want their leader.” His gauntleted fists clenched. “I want that bastard who is deliberately slaughtering
my people!” He thought about the crates they had seen earlier, and the seal they bore. He lifted his eyes
and looked down the road. “And it’s a good bet that we’ll find him, and the answers we’re looking for, in
Andorhal.”
 World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 CHAPTER ELEVEN
 Arthas was pushing his men too hard and he knew it, but time was a precious resource and could
not be squandered. He felt a tug of guilt when he saw Jaina chewing on some dried meat as they rode.
The Light refreshed him when he worked with it; magi drew on different energies, and he knew that
Jaina was exhausted after the superb effort she had put forth earlier. But there was no time for rest, not
when thousands of lives depended upon their actions.
 He’d been sent on a mission to find out what was going on and stop it. The mystery was starting to
unravel, but he was beginning to doubt his ability to halt the plague. Nothing was as easy as it had
looked at first. Still, Arthas would not give up. Could not give up. He had vowed to do whatever it
took to stop this, to save his people, and so he would.
 They saw and smelled the smoke rising in the sky before they reached the gates of Andorhal. Arthas
hoped that if the town had burned, then maybe at least the grain had been destroyed as well, and then
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 86
felt a twinge of guilt at the callousness of the thought. He buried it in action, kicking his mount hard
and riding through the gates, expecting to be assaulted at any moment.
 Around them buildings burned, black smoke stinging his eyes and making him cough. Through
tear- filled eyes he peered around. There were no villagers, but neither were there any undead. What
was—
 “I believe you have come looking for me, children,” came a smooth voice. The wind shifted, driving
the smoke in a different direction, and Arthas could now see a black- robed figure standing only a short
distance away. Arthas tensed. This, then, was the leader. The necromancer was smiling now, his face
dimly glimpsed in the shadow of his hood, a smirk that Arthas burned to cut off his face. Beside him
were two of his pet undead. “You’ve found me. I am Kel’Thuzad.”
 Jaina gasped in recognition at the name, and her hand flew to her mouth. Arthas spared her a quick
glance, then returned his full attention to the speaker. He gripped his hammer tightly.
 “I’ve come to deliver a warning,” said the necromancer. “Leave well enough alone. Your curiosity
will be the death of you.”
 “I thought this magic taint felt familiar!” It was Jaina, her voice shaking with outrage. “You were
disgraced, Kel’Thuzad, precisely for your experiments along this line! We told you it would lead to
disaster. And you have learned nothing!”
 “Lady Jaina Proudmoore,” Kel’Thuzad purred. “Looks like Antonidas’s little apprentice is all grown
up. And quite the contrary my dear…as you can see, I have learned a great deal.”
 “I saw the rats you experimented with!” Jaina cried. “That was bad enough—but now you—”
 “Have furthered my research and perfected it,” Kel’Thuzad answered.
 “Are you responsible for this plague, necromancer?” Arthas shouted. “Is this cult your doing?”
 Kel’Thuzad turned to him, his eyes glittering in the shadow of his cowl. “I ordered the Cult of the
Damned to distribute the plagued grain. But the sole credit is not mine.”
 Before Arthas could speak, Jaina had burst out, “What do you mean?”
 “I serve the dreadlord Mal’Ganis. He commands the Scourge that will cleanse this land and
establish a paradise of eternal darkness!”
 A chill swept over Arthas despite the heat of the surrounding fires at the tone of the man’s voice. He
did not know what a “dreadlord” was, but the meaning of “Scourge” was clear. “And what exactly is this
Scourge meant to cleanse?”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 87
 The thin- lipped mouth beneath the white mustache again curled in a cruel smile. “Why, the living,
of course. His plan is already in motion. Seek him out at Stratholme if you need further proof.”
 Arthas had had enough of teasing hints and taunts. He growled, gripped the haft of his hammer,
and charged forward. “For the Light!” he cried.
 Kel’Thuzad had not moved. He stood his ground, then, at the last minute, the air around him
twisted and puckered, and he was gone. The two creatures who had stood silently at his sides now
clamped their arms on Arthas, trying to wrestle him down to the earth, their fetid stench vying with the
smell of smoke to choke him. He twisted free, landing a strong, clean blow to the head of one of them.
Its skull shattered like a fragile piece of blown glass, brains spattering the earth as it collapsed. The
second was as easily dealt with.
 “The granary!” he cried, running to his horse and leaping atop it. “Come on!”
 The others mounted up and they charged down the main path through the burning village. The
granaries loomed up ahead of them. They were untouched by the fire that seemed to be racing through
the rest of Andorhal.
 Arthas drew his horse up sharply and leaped off it, running as fast as he could toward the buildings.
He pulled open the door, hoping desperately to see crates piled high. Grief and rage swept through
him as the only thing to meet his gaze were empty chambers—empty save for small, scattered bits of
grain and the corpses of rats on the floor. He stared, sick, for a moment, then raced to the next one, and
the next, yanking the doors open even though he knew exactly what he would find.
 They were all empty. And had been for some time, if the layers of dust on the floor and the
spiderwebs in the corners were any indication.
 “The shipments have already been sent out,” he said brokenly as Jaina stepped up beside him. “We’re
too late!” He slammed his gauntleted fist into the wooden door and Jaina jumped. “Dammit!”
 “Arthas, we did the best we—”
 He whirled on her furiously. “I’m going to find him. I’m going to find that undead- loving bastard
and rip him limb from limb for this! Let him get someone to sew him back together.”
 He stormed out, shaking. He’d failed. He’d had the man right there and he’d failed. The grain had
been sent out, and Light alone knew how many people would die because of that.
 Because of him.
 No. He was not going to let that happen. He would protect his people. He would die to protect
them. Arthas clenched his fists.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 88
 “North,” he said to the men who trailed behind him, unaccustomed to seeing their generally goodnatured prince in the grip of such fury. “That’s the next place he’ll go. Let’s exterminate him like the
vermin he is.”
 He rode like a man possessed, galloping north, almost absently slaughtering the shambling wrecks
of human beings who attempted to stop him. He was no longer moved by the horror of it all; his mind’s
eye was filled with the vision of the man manipulating it and the disgusting cult that perpetrated it.
The dead would rest soon enough; Arthas had to ensure that no more would be made.
 At one point there was a huge cluster of the undead. Rotting heads lifted as one, turning toward
Arthas and his men, and they moved toward him. Arthas cried out, “For the Light!”, kicked his steed,
and charged in among them, swinging his hammer and crying out incoherently, venting his anger and
frustration on these, the perfect targets. At one point, there was a lull, and he was able to look around.
 Safe and secure away from the field of battle, overseeing everything while risking nothing, stood a
tall figure in a fluttering black cloak. As if waiting for them.
 Kel’Thuzad.
 “There!” he cried. “He’s there!”
 Jaina and his men followed him, Jaina blasting clear passage with fireball after fireball, and his men
hacking the undead that did not fall in the first round of attacks. Arthas felt righteous fury singing in
his veins as he drew closer and closer to the necromancer. His hammer rose and fell, seemingly
effortlessly, and he didn’t even see those he struck down. His eyes were fixed on the man—if you could
even call such a monster that—responsible for everything in the first place. Cut off the head, and the
beast would die.
 Then Arthas was there. A bellow of raw fury exploded from him and he swung, sweeping his
brilliantly glowing hammer parallel to the ground, striking Kel’Thuzad at the knees and sending him
flying. Others pressed in, swords slicing and hacking, the men venting their grief and outrage on the
source, the cause, of the entire disaster.
 For all his power and magic, it seemed as though Kel’Thuzad could indeed die like any other man.
Both legs were shattered by Arthas’s sweeping blow and lay at odd angles. His robes were wet with
blood, shiny black against a matte black, and red trickled from his mouth. He propped himself up on
his arms and tried to speak, spitting out blood and teeth. He tried again.
 “Naïve…fool,” he managed, swallowing. “My death will make little difference in the long run…for
now…the scourging of this land…begins.”
 His elbows buckled and, eyes closing, he fell.
 The body began to rot immediately. Decomposition that should have taken days happened in mere
seconds, the flesh paling, bloating, bursting open. The men gasped and started back, covering their
noses and mouths. Some of them turned and vomited from the stench. Arthas stared, horrified and
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 89
enraptured at the same time, unable to look away. Fluids gushed from the corpse, the flesh taking on a
creamy consistency and turning black. The unnatural decomposition slowed and Arthas turned away,
gasping for fresh air.
 Jaina was deathly pale with dark circles around her wide, shocked eyes. Arthas went to her and
turned her away from the disgusting image. “What happened to him?” he asked quietly.
 Jaina swallowed, trying to calm herself. Again, she seemed to find strength in her detachment. “It is
believed that, ah, if necromancers are not perfectly precise in their magical workings that, um…if they
are killed they are subject to…” Her voice trailed off and suddenly she was a young woman, looking
sickened and shocked. “That.”
 “Come on,” Arthas said gently. “Let’s get to Hearthglen. They need to be warned—if we’re not too
late already.”
 They left the body where it had fallen, not granting it another glance. Arthas said a silent prayer to
the Light that they were not too late. He did not know what he would do if he failed again.

 Jaina was exhausted. She knew that Arthas wanted to make the best time possible, and she shared
his concern. Lives were at stake. So when he asked her if she could go through the night without
stopping, she nodded.
 They had been riding hard for four hours when she found herself half off her mount. She was so
bone- weary she’d fallen unconscious for a few seconds. Fear shot through her and she grabbed onto
the horse’s mane wildly, pulling herself back up into the saddle and yanking on the reins so the horse
would stop.
 She sat there, the reins clutched in her hands, trembling, for several minutes before Arthas realized
she’d fallen behind. Dimly she heard him calling a halt. She looked up at him mutely as he cantered up
to her.
 “Jaina, what’s wrong?”
 “I…I’m sorry Arthas. I know you want to make good time and so do I, but—I was so tired I almost
fell off. Could we stop, for just a little while?”
 She saw the concern for her and frustration at the situation warring on his face, even in the dim
light. “How long do you think you’ll need?”
 A couple of days, she wanted to say, but instead she said, “Just long enough to eat something and
rest for a bit.”
 He nodded, reaching up to her and helping her off the horse. He bore her to the side of the road,
where he set her down gently. Jaina fished in her pack for some cheese with hands that trembled. She
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 90
expected him to head off and talk to the men, but instead he sat down beside her. Impatience radiated
from him like heat from a fire.
 She took a bite of cheese and looked up at him as she chewed, analyzing his profile in the starlight.
One of the things she most loved about Arthas was how accessible, how human and emotional, he was
to her. But now, while he was certainly in the grip of powerful emotions, he felt distant, as if he was a
hundred miles away.
 Impulsively she reached a hand to touch his face. He started at her touch, as if he had forgotten she
was there, then smiled thinly at her. “Done?” he asked.
 Jaina thought about the single bite she had eaten. “No,” she said, “but…Arthas, I’m worried about
you. I don’t like what this is doing to you.”
 “Doing to me?” he snapped. “What about what it’s doing to the villagers? They’re dying and then
getting turned into corpses, Jaina. I have to stop it, I have to!”
 “Of course we do, and I’ll do everything I can to help; you know that. But…I’ve never seen you hate
anything like this.”
 He laughed, a short harsh bark. “You want me to love necromancers?”
 She frowned. “Arthas, don’t twist my words like that. You’re a paladin. A servant of the Light.
You’re a healer as much as a warrior, but all I see in you is this desire to wipe out the enemy.”
 “You’re starting to sound like Uther.”
 Jaina didn’t reply. She was so weary, it was difficult to compose her thoughts. She took another bite
of cheese, focusing on getting the badly needed nourishment into her body. For some reason it was
hard for her to swallow.
 “Jaina…I just want innocent people to stop dying. That’s all. And…I admit, I’m upset that I can’t
seem to make that happen. But once this is over, you’ll see. Everything will be fine again. I promise.”
 He smiled down at her, and for a moment she saw the old Arthas in his handsome face. She smiled
back in what she hoped was a reassuring fashion.
 “Are you done now?”
 Two bites. Jaina put the rest of the cheese away. “Yes, I’m done. Let’s keep going.”

 The sky was turning from black to the ashy gray of dawn when they first heard the gunfire. Arthas’s
heart sank. He spurred his horse as they wound their way north up the long road that cut through the
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 91
deceptively pleasant hills. Just outside the gates of Hearthglen, they saw several men and dwarves
armed with rifles—all trained on them. Wafted to him on the light breeze, mixed in with the smell of
gunpowder, was the incongruously pleasant, slightly sweet scent of baking bread.
 “Hold your fire!” Arthas cried as his troops galloped up. He drew rein so hard his mount reared in
startlement. “I am Prince Arthas! What’s going on? Why are you so armed?”
 They lowered their rifles, clearly surprised to see their prince standing right in front of them. “Sir,
you won’t believe what’s been going on.”
 “Try me,” Arthas said.
 Arthas was not surprised to hear the initial words—that the dead had risen and were attacking.
What did surprise him was the term “vast army.” He glanced at Jaina. She looked utterly exhausted.
The little break they had taken last night obviously hadn’t been sufficient to restore her.
 “Sir,” cried one of the scouts, rushing in, “the army—it’s heading this way!”
 “Dammit,” Arthas muttered. This small group of men and dwarves could handle a skirmish well
enough, but not a whole damned army of the things. He made a decision. “Jaina, I’ll stay here to protect
the village. Go as quickly as you can and tell Lord Uther what’s happened.”
 “But—”
 “Go, Jaina! Every second counts!”
 She nodded. Light bless her and that level head of hers. He spared her a smile of gratitude before
she stepped through the portal she created and disappeared.
 “Sir,” said Falric, and something in the tone of his voice made Arthas turn. “You’d…better take a
look at this.”
 Arthas followed the man’s gaze and his heart sank. Empty crates…bearing the mark of Andorhal…
 Hoping against hope that he was wrong, Arthas asked in a voice that shook slightly, “What did
those crates contain?”
 One of the Hearthglen men looked at him, puzzled. “Just a grain shipment from Andorhal. There’s
no need to worry, milord. It’s already been distributed among the villagers. We’ve had plenty of bread.”
 That was the smell—not the typical smell of baking bread, but slightly off, slightly too sweet—and
then Arthas understood. He staggered, just a little, as the enormity of the situation, the true scope of its
horror, burst over him. The grain had been distributed…and suddenly there was a vast army of the
undead….
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 92
 “Oh, no,” he whispered. They stared at him and he tried again to speak, his voice still shaking. But
this time, not with horror, but with fury.
 The plague was never meant to simply kill his people. No, no, it was much darker, much more
twisted than that. It was meant to turn them into—
 Even as the thought formed, the man who had answered Arthas’s question about the crate bent
over double. Several others followed suit. A strange green glow limned their bodies, pulsing and
growing stronger. They clutched their stomachs and fell to the earth, blood erupting from their
mouths, saturating their shirts. One of them stretched out a hand to him, imploring for healing.
Instead, Arthas, repulsed, recoiled in horror, staring as the man writhed in pain and died in a matter of
seconds.
 What had he done? The man had begged for healing, but Arthas had not even lifted a hand. But
could this even be healed, Arthas wondered as he stared at the corpse. Could the Light even—
 “Merciful Light!” Falric cried. “The bread—”
 Arthas started at the shout, coming out of his guilty trance. Bread—the staff of life—wholesome and
nourishing—had now become worse than lethal. Arthas opened his mouth to cry out, to warn his men,
but his tongue was like clay in his mouth.
 The plague embedded into the grain acted even before the shocked prince could find words.
 The dead man’s eyes opened. He lurched upright into a seated position.
 And that was how Kel’Thuzad had created an undead army in so astonishingly short a time.
 Insane laughter echoed in his ears—Kel’Thuzad, laughing maniacally, triumphant even in death.
Arthas wondered if he was going mad from all he had been forced to bear witness to. The undead
clambered to their feet, and their movement galvanized him to action and liberated his tongue.
 “Defend yourselves!” Arthas cried, swinging his hammer before the man had a chance to rise.
Others were swifter, though, getting to dead feet, turning the weapons that in life they would have
used to protect Arthas upon him. The only advantage he had was that the undead were not graceful
with their weapons, and most of the shots they fired went wide. Arthas’s men, meanwhile, attacked
with hard eyes and grim faces, bashing skulls, decapitating, smashing what had been allies just a few
moments earlier into submission.
 “Prince Arthas, the undead forces have arrived!”
 Arthas whirled, his armor spattered with gore, and his eyes widened slightly.
 So many. There were so many of them, skeletons who had been long dead, fresh corpses recently
turned, more of the pale, maggoty abominations thundering down on them. He could sense the panic.
They had fought handfuls, but not this—not an army of the walking dead.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 93
 Arthas thrust his hammer into the air. It flared to glowing life. “Hold your ground!” he cried, his
voice no longer weak and shaking or harsh and angry. “We are the chosen of the Light! We shall not
fall!”
 The Light bathing his determined features, he charged.

 Jaina was more exhausted than she had admitted even to herself. Drained after the days of fighting
with little or no rest, she collapsed after finishing the teleportation spell. She thought she blacked out
for a moment, because the next thing she knew her master was bending over her, lifting her off the
floor.
 “Jaina—child, what is it?”
 “Uther,” Jaina managed. “Arthas—Hearthglen—” She reached up and clutched Antonidas’s robes.
“Necromancers—Kel’Thuzad—raising the dead to fight—”
 Antonidas’s eyes widened. Jaina gulped and continued. “Arthas and his men are fighting in
Hearthglen alone. He needs reinforcements immediately!”
 “I think Uther is at the palace,” Antonidas said. “I’ll send several magi there right away to open
portals for as many men as he needs to bring. You did well, my dear. I’m very proud of you. Now, you
get some rest.”
 “No!” Jaina cried. She struggled to her feet, barely able to stand, forcing the exhaustion back by
sheer will alone, holding out a shaking hand to keep Antonidas back. “I have to be with him. I’ll be all
right. Come on!”

 Arthas had no idea how long he had been fighting. He swung his hammer almost ceaselessly, his
arms shaking from the strain, his lungs burning. It was only the power of the Light, flowing through
him with quiet strength and steadiness, that kept him and his men on their feet. The undead seemed to
be weakened by its power, although that seemed to be their only weakness. Only a clean kill—Arthas
fleetingly wondered if you could call it a “kill” if they were already dead—stopped them in their tracks.
 They just kept coming. Wave after wave of them. His subjects—his people—turned into these
things. He lifted his weary arms for another blow when over the din of battle came a voice Arthas
knew:
 “For Lordaeron! For the king!”
 The men rallied at Uther the Lightbringer’s impassioned shout, renewing their attacks. Uther had
come with a solid core of knights, fresh and battle- hardened. They did not shirk from the undead—
Jaina, who despite her bone- weariness had also portaled in with Uther and the knights, had
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 94
apparently briefed them sufficiently so that precious seconds were not wasted in stunned reaction. The
undead fell more quickly now, and each wave was met with fierce and impassioned attacks from
hammer, sword, and flame.

 Jaina sank down, her legs giving way beneath her, as the last of the walking dead burst into flames,
stumbled about, and fell, dead in truth. She reached for a waterskin and drank deeply, shaking, and
fished out some dried meat to gnaw on. The fight was over—for the moment. Arthas and Uther had
both removed their helms. Sweat matted their hair. She chewed on the meat and watched as Uther
looked out over the sea of undead corpses and nodded his satisfaction. Arthas was staring at
something, his expression stricken. Jaina followed his gaze and frowned, not understanding. Corpses
were everywhere—but Arthas was looking almost as if in a daze at the bloated, fly- riddled body of not
one of his soldiers, or even a man, but of a horse.
 Uther walked up to his student and clapped Arthas on the shoulder.
 “I’m surprised that you kept things together as long as you did, lad.” His voice was warm with pride
and a smile was on his lips. “If I hadn’t arrived just then—”
 Arthas whirled. “Look, I did the best I could, Uther!” Both Uther and Jaina blinked at the harsh
tone of voice. He was overreacting—Uther wasn’t censuring him; he was praising him. “If I’d had a
legion of knights riding at my back, I would’ve—”
 Uther’s eyes narrowed. “Now is not the time to be choking on pride! From what Jaina has told me,
what we faced here was only the beginning.”
 Arthas’s sea- green eyes darted to Jaina. He was still smarting from the perceived insult and for the
first time since Jaina had met him, she found herself shrinking a little from that piercing gaze.
 “Or did you not notice that the undead ranks are bolstered every time one of our warriors falls in
battle?” Uther persisted.
 “Then we should strike at their leader!” Arthas snapped. “Kel’Thuzad told me who it was and where
to find him. It’s—something called a dreadlord. His name is Mal’Ganis. And he’s in Stratholme.
Stratholme, Uther. The very place where you were made a paladin of the Light. Doesn’t that mean
anything to you?”
 Uther sighed wearily. “Of course it does, but—”
 “I’ll go there and kill Mal’Ganis myself if I have to!” Arthas cried. Jaina stopped chewing and stared
at him. She had never seen him like this.
 “Easy, lad. Brave as you are, you can’t hope to defeat a man who commands the dead all by yourself.”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 95
 “Then feel free to tag along, Uther. I’m going, with or without you.” Before either Uther or Jaina
could protest further, he’d leaped into the saddle, yanked his steed’s head around, and headed south.
 Jaina got to her feet, stunned. He’d left without Uther—without his men…without her. Uther
quietly stepped beside her. She shook her fair head.
 “He feels personally responsible for all the deaths,” she told the older paladin quietly. “He thinks he
should have been able to stop this.” She looked up at Uther. “Not even the magi of Dalaran—the ones
who warned Kel’Thuzad in the first place—suspected what was going on. Arthas couldn’t possibly
have known.”
 “He’s feeling the weight of the crown for the first time,” Uther said quietly. “He’s never had to
before. This is all part of it, my lady—part of learning how to rule wisely and well. I watched Terenas
struggle with the same thing, when he was a young man. Both good men, both wanting to do the right
things for their people. To keep them safe and happy.” His eyes were thoughtful as he watched Arthas
fade into the distance. “But sometimes the only decision is which is the lesser evil. Sometimes there’s no
way to fix everything. Arthas is learning that.”
 “I think I understand but—I can’t let him just charge off by himself.”
 “No, no, once I get the men ready for a long march, we’ll be on his trail. You should rest up too.”
 Jaina shook her head. “No. He shouldn’t be alone.”
 “Lady Proudmoore, if I may,” Uther said slowly. “It might be good to let him clear his head. Follow
him if you must, but give him a little time to think.”
 His meaning was obvious. She didn’t like it, but she agreed with him. Arthas was distraught. He
was feeling angry and impotent and wasn’t in a state to be reasoned with. And it was precisely for those
reasons she couldn’t let him be really alone.
 “All right,” she said. She mounted up and murmured the spell. She saw Uther grin as he suddenly
realized he could no longer see her. “I’ll follow him. Come as soon as your men are ready.”
 She would not follow him too closely. She was invisible, but not silent. Jaina squeezed her horse
with her knees into a canter to pursue the bright, brooding prince of Lordaeron.

 Arthas kicked the horse hard, angry that it was not going faster, angry that it was not Invincible,
angry that he had not figured out what was going on in time to stop it. It was almost overwhelming.
His father had had to deal with orcs—creatures from another world, flooding into their own, brutal
and violent and bent on conquest. That seemed like child’s play to Arthas now. How would his father
and the Alliance have fared against this—a plague that not only killed people, but in a sick twist that
only a deranged mind would find amusing animated their corpses to fight their own friends and
families? Would Terenas have done any better? One moment Arthas thought he would have—that
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 96
Terenas would have figured out the puzzle in time to stop it, to save the innocent—and the next he
rationalized that no one could have done so. Terenas would have been as helpless as he in the face of
this horror.
 So deep in thought was he that he almost didn’t see the man standing in the road, and it was with a
sharp, startled yank that he pulled his mount to the side just in time.
 Chagrined, worried, and furious at being made so, Arthas snapped, “Fool! What are you doing? I
could have run you down!”
 The man was unlike any Arthas had ever seen before, and yet he struck the youth as somewhat
familiar. Tall, broad- shouldered, he wore a cloak that seemed to be made entirely out of shiny black
feathers. His features were shadowed by the cowl, but his eyes were bright as they peered up at Arthas.
A beard streaked with gray parted, revealing a white smile.
 “You would not have harmed me, and I required your attention,” he said, his voice deep and mild. “I
spoke to your father, young one. He would not hear me. Now I come to you.” He bowed, and Arthas
frowned. It seemed to be—mocking. “We must talk.”
 Arthas snorted. Now he knew why this mysterious, dramatically clad stranger seemed so familiar.
He was some kind of mystic—a self- styled prophet, Terenas had said; able to transform into a bird.
He’d had the gall to come right into Terenas’s own throne room, with some kind of doomsday blather.
 “I have no time for this,” Arthas growled, gathering up his horse’s reins.
 “Listen to me, boy.” There was no mocking note in the stranger’s voice now. His voice cracked like a
whip and despite himself Arthas listened. “This land is lost! The shadow has already fallen, and
nothing you do will deter it. If you truly wish to save your people, lead them across the sea…to the
west.”
 Arthas almost laughed. His father had been right—this was a madman. “Flee? My place is here, and
my only course is to defend my people! I will not abandon them to this hideous existence. I will find the
one behind this and destroy him. You’re a fool if you think otherwise.”
 “A fool, am I? I suppose I am, to think the son would be wiser than the father.” The bright eyes
looked troubled. “Your choice is already made. You will not be swayed by one who sees farther than
you.”
 “I’ve only your word that you see farther. I know what I see, and what I have seen, and that is that
my people need me here!”
 The prophet smiled now, sadly. “It is not only with our eyes that we see, Prince Arthas. It is with
our wisdom and our hearts. I will leave you one final prediction. Just remember, the harder you strive
to slay your enemies, the faster you’ll deliver your people into their hands.”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 97
 Arthas opened his mouth for a furious retort, but at that instant the stranger’s shape shifted. The
cloak seemed to close about him like a second skin. Wings, jet black and glossy, sprouted from his body
even as he shrank to the size of an ordinary raven. With a final harsh caw that sounded frustrated to
Arthas, the bird that had been a man leaped into the air, wheeled once, and flew off. He watched it go,
vaguely troubled. The man had seemed…so certain….
 “I’m sorry for concealing myself, Arthas.” Jaina’s voice coming out of nowhere. Startled, Arthas
whipped his head around, trying to find her. She materialized in front of him, looking contrite. “I just
wanted to—”
 “Don’t say it!”
 He saw her start in surprise, saw those blue eyes widen, and instantly regretted snapping at her.
But she shouldn’t have sneaked up on him like this, spied on him like this.
 “He came to Antonidas, too,” she said after a moment, doggedly continuing with what she had
intended to say despite his reprimand. “I—I have to say that I sensed tremendous power about him,
Arthas.” She rode closer to him, peering up at him. “This plague of the undead—nothing like this has
ever been seen before in the history of the world. It’s not just another battle, or another war—it’s
something much bigger and darker than that. And maybe you can’t use the same tactics to win. Maybe
he’s right. Maybe he can see things we can’t—maybe he does know what will happen.”
 He turned away from her, grinding his teeth. “Maybe. Or maybe he’s some ally of this Mal’Ganis.
Or maybe he’s just some crazy hermit. Nothing he can say will make me abandon my homeland, Jaina.
I don’t care if that madman has seen the future. Let’s go.”
 They rode in silence for a moment. Then Jaina said quietly, “Uther will be following. He just
needed some extra time to prepare the men.”
 Arthas stared straight ahead, still fuming. Jaina tried again.
 “Arthas, you shouldn’t—”
 “I am sick of people trying to tell me what I should and shouldn’t do!” The words burst from him,
startling himself as much as Jaina. “What’s going on here is beyond horrible, Jaina. I can’t even find
words to describe it. And I’m doing everything I possibly can. If you’re not going to support my
decisions then maybe you don’t belong here.” He eyed her, his expression softening. “You look so tired,
Jaina. Maybe…maybe you should go back.”
 She shook her head, staring straight ahead, not meeting his gaze. “You need me here. I can help.”
 The anger bled away from him, and he reached for her hand, closing fingers encased in metal over
hers gently. “I shouldn’t have spoken to you like that and I’m sorry. I’m glad you’re here. I’m always glad
of your company.” He bent and kissed her hand. Color came to her cheeks and she smiled at him, the
furrow in her brow uncreasing.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 98
 “Dear Arthas,” she said softly. He squeezed her hand and let it go.
 They rode hard the rest of the day, not speaking much, and halted to make camp as the sun was
going down. Both of them were too weary to hunt for any fresh meat, so they simply took out some
dried meat, apples, and bread. Arthas stared at the loaf in his hand. From the ovens of the palace,
baked with grain grown locally—not from Andorhal. It was wholesome fare, nourishing and delicious,
smelling yeasty and good and not sickly sweet. A simple, basic food, something that everyone, anyone,
should be able to eat without fear.
 His throat suddenly closed up and he placed the bread down, unable to eat a bite, and he put his
head in his hands. For a moment he felt overwhelmed, as if a tidal wave of despair and helplessness
washed over him. Then Jaina was there, kneeling beside him, resting her head on his shoulder while he
struggled to compose himself. She said nothing; she did not need to, her simple, supportive presence
was all he needed. Then with a deep sigh he turned to her and took her in his arms.
 She responded, kissing him deeply, needing comfort and reassurance from him as much as he did
from her. Arthas ran his hands through her silky golden hair and breathed her scent. And for a few brief
hours that night, they permitted themselves to be lost in each other, pushing away thoughts of death
and horror and plagued grain and prophets and choices, their world narrow and tender and comprised
only of the two of them.
 World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 CHAPTER TWELVE
 Still half asleep, Jaina awoke and reached out a hand for Arthas. He was not there. Blinking, she sat
up. He was already awake and dressed, cooking some sort of hot cereal for them. He smiled when he
saw her, but it didn’t reach his eyes. Jaina tentatively returned the smile and reached for her robe,
slipping it on and combing her hair with her fingers.
 “There’s something I learned,” Arthas said without preamble. “Last night—I didn’t want to mention
it. But you need to know.” His voice was flat and Jaina felt something inside her quail. At least he
wasn’t screaming, like he had been yesterday—but somehow this was worse. He ladled up a bowl of
steaming grains and brought it over to her. She spooned it automatically into her mouth as he
continued to speak.
 “This plague—the undead—” He took a deep breath. “We knew that the grain was plagued. We
knew that it killed people. But it’s worse than that, Jaina. It doesn’t just kill them.”
 The words seemed to catch in his throat. Jaina sat there for a moment, as understanding dawned.
She thought she’d throw up the grains she’d just eaten. Her breath seemed to come with difficulty.
 “It…turns them, somehow. It makes them into the undead…doesn’t it?” Please tell me I’m wrong,
Arthas.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 99
 He didn’t. Instead he nodded his golden head. “That’s why there were so many of them so quickly.
The grain reached Hearthglen a short time ago—long enough to be milled into flour and baked into
bread.”
 Jaina stared at him. The implications of this—she couldn’t even wrap her mind around them.
 “That’s why I rushed off yesterday. I knew I couldn’t take Mal’Ganis by myself, but—Jaina, I just
couldn’t sit around and—and mend armor and make camp, you know?” She nodded dumbly. She did
understand, now. “And that prophet—I don’t care how powerful you think he is. I can’t just leave and
let all of Lordaeron turn into this—this—Mal’Ganis, whatever, whomever he is, has got to be stopped.
We’ve got to find every last crate of this plagued grain and destroy it.”
 The telling of this shocking information seemed to agitate Arthas again, and he got to his feet,
pacing. “Where the hell is Uther?” he said. “He had all night to ride here.”
 Jaina placed aside the half- eaten cereal, got to her feet, and finished dressing. Her mind was
working a thousand miles a minute, trying to comprehend the situation fully and dispassionately, trying
to think of some way to combat it. Wordlessly they broke camp and headed for Stratholme.
 The ashy grayness of dawn only darkened as the clouds closed off the sun. Rain began to fall, chilly
and stinging. Both Arthas and Jaina flipped the hoods of their cloaks up, but that did little to keep
Jaina dry, and she was shivering by the time they reached the gates of the great city. Almost as they
drew rein, Jaina heard sounds behind her and turned to see Uther and his men coming up the dirt road
that was now almost pure mud. By this point, Arthas had worked himself up again, and he turned to
Uther with a bitter grin.
 “Glad you could make it, Uther,” he snapped.
 Uther was a patient man, but he lost his temper now. Arthas and Jaina were not the only ones under
strain. “Watch your tone with me, boy! You may be the prince, but I’m still your superior as a paladin!”
 “As if I could forget,” Arthas retorted. He moved quickly to the top of a rise, so he could look over
the walls and into the city. He didn’t know what he was looking for. Signs of life, of normalcy, perhaps.
Signs that they’d gotten here in time. Anything to give him hope that he could still somehow do
something. “Listen, Uther, there’s something about the plague you should know. The grain—”
 The wind shifted as he spoke, and the scent that reached his nostrils was not an unpleasant one.
Nonetheless, Arthas felt as though he’d been punched in the gut. The smell, the strange, unique scent
of bread baked with the tainted grain, unmistakable on the air damp with rain.
 Light, no. Already milled, already baked, already—
 The blood drained from Arthas’s face. His eyes widened, staring starkly in horrified comprehension.
“We’re too late. We’re too damned late! The grain—these people—” He tried again. “These people have
all been infected.”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 100
 “Arthas—” Jaina began in a low voice.
 “They may look fine now, but it’s just a matter of time before they turn into the undead!”
 “What?” cried Uther. “Lad, have you gone insane?”
 “No,” Jaina said. “He’s right. If they’ve eaten the grain, they’re infected—and if they’re infected…
they’ll turn.” She was thinking furiously. There had to be something they could do. Antonidas once told
her, if a thing is magical in origin, then magic can combat it. If they just had a little time to think, if they
could calm down and react from logic and not emotion, perhaps a cure could—
 “This entire city must be purged.”
 Arthas’s statement was blunt and brutal. Jaina blinked. Surely he hadn’t meant that.
 “How can you even consider that?” Uther cried, marching up to his former student. “There’s got to
be some other way. This isn’t a blighted apple crop, this is a city full of human beings!”
 “Damn it, Uther! We have to do it!” Arthas shoved his face within an inch of Uther’s, and for a
dreadful moment Jaina was convinced they’d draw weapons on each other.
 “Arthas, no! We can’t do that!” The words left her lips before she could stop them. He whirled on
her, his sea- colored eyes now stormy with anger and hurt and despair. She realized immediately that
he truly thought this was the only option—the only way to save other, uncorrupted lives was to sacrifice
these cursed ones, these that could no longer be salvaged. His face softened slightly as she rushed on,
trying to get the words out before he could interrupt her. “Listen to me. We don’t know how many
people are infected. Some of them might not have eaten any of the grain at all—others might not have
eaten a lethal dose. We don’t even know what a lethal dose is yet. We know so little—we can’t just
slaughter them like animals out of our own fear!”
 It was the wrong thing to say, and she watched as Arthas’s face closed up. “I’m trying to protect the
innocent, Jaina. That’s what I swore to do.”
 “They are innocent—they’re victims! They didn’t ask for this! Arthas, there are children in there. We
don’t know if it affects them. There’s too much unknown for such a—a drastic solution.”
 “What of those who are infected?” he asked with a sudden, frightening quiet. “They’ll kill those
children, Jaina. They’ll try to kill us…and spread out from here and keep killing. They’re going to die
regardless, and when they rise, they’ll do things that in life they would never, ever have wanted to do.
What would you choose, Jaina?”
 She hadn’t expected that. She looked from Arthas to Uther, then back again. “I—I don’t know.”
 “Yes, you do.” He was right, and despairingly, she knew it. “Wouldn’t you rather die now than die
from this plague? Die a clean death as a thinking, living human being rather than be raised as an
undead to attack everyone, everything you loved in life?”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 101
 Her face crumpled. “I…that would be my personal choice, yes. But we can’t make that choice for
them. Don’t you see?”
 He shook his head. “No. I don’t see. We need to purge this city before any of them have a chance to
escape and spread the contagion. Before any of them turn. It’s a kindness and it’s the only solution to
stop this plague right here, right now, dead in its tracks. And that is exactly what I intend to do.”
 Tears of anguish burned in Jaina’s eyes.
 “Arthas—give me a little time. Just a day or two. I can teleport back to Antonidas and we can call an
emergency meeting. Maybe we can figure out some way to—”
 “We don’t have a day or two!” The words exploded from Arthas. “Jaina, this affects people within
hours. Maybe minutes. I—I saw it at Hearthglen. There’s no time for deliberation or discussion. We
have to act. Now. Or it will be too late.” He turned to Uther, dismissing Jaina.
 “As your future king, I order you to purge this city!”
 “You’re not my king yet, boy! Nor would I obey that command even if you were!”
 The silence that fell crackled with tension.
 Arthas…beloved, best friend…please don’t do this.
 “Then I must consider this an act of treason.” Arthas’s voice was cold, clipped. If he had struck her
across the face, Jaina could not have been more shocked.
 “Treason?” Uther spluttered. “Have you lost your mind, Arthas?”
 “Have I? Lord Uther, by my right of succession and the sovereignty of my crown, I hereby relieve
you of your command and suspend your paladins from service.”
 “Arthas!” Jaina yelped, her tongue freed in her shock. “You can’t just—”
 He whirled on her furiously and spat, “It’s done!”
 She stared at him. He turned to look at his men, who had stood by silent and wary as the argument
had progressed. “Those of you who have the will to save this land, follow me! The rest of you…get out
of my sight!”
 Jaina felt sick and dizzy. He was really going to do this. He was going to march into Stratholme
and cut down every living man, woman, and child within its walls. She swayed and clutched the reins
of her horse. It lowered its head and whickered at her, blowing warm breath from its soft muzzle
across her cheek. She was fiercely envious of its ignorance.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 102
 She wondered if Uther would attack his former pupil. But he was bound by an oath to serve his
prince, even if he had been relieved of command. She saw the tendons on his neck stand out like cords,
could almost hear him gritting his teeth. But he did not attack his liege.
 Loyalty, however, did not still his tongue. “You’ve just crossed a terrible threshold, Arthas.”
 Arthas looked at him a moment longer, then shrugged. He turned to Jaina, his eyes searching hers,
and for a moment—just a moment—he looked like himself, earnest, young, a little scared.
 “Jaina?”
 The single word was so much more. It was both question and plea. Even as she stared at him,
frozen like the bird before the snake, he reached out a gauntleted hand to her. She stared at it for a
moment, thinking of all the times that hand had clasped hers warmly, had caressed her, had been lain
on the wounded and glowed with healing light.
 She could not take that hand.
 “I’m sorry, Arthas. I can’t watch you do this.”
 There was no mask on his face now, no merciful coldness to shutter his pain away from her.
Shocked disbelief radiated from him. She couldn’t bear to look at him anymore. Gulping, her eyes filled
with tears, Jaina turned away to find Uther regarding her with compassion and approval. He held out
his hand to help her mount and she was grateful for his steadiness and composure. Jaina was shaking,
badly, and clung to her horse as Uther mounted and, holding her horse’s reins, led them both away
from the greatest horror they had yet encountered in this whole dreadful ordeal.
 “Jaina?” Arthas’s voice followed her.
 She closed her eyes, tears slipping from beneath closed lids. “I’m sorry,” she whispered again. “I’m so
sorry.”
 “Jaina?…Jaina!”

 She had turned her back on him.
 He couldn’t believe it. For a long moment he simply stared, dumbfounded, at her retreating figure.
How could she abandon him like this? She knew him. She knew him better than anyone else in the
world had known him, better maybe than he knew himself. She had always understood him. His mind
suddenly went back to the night they had become lovers, bathed first in the orange glow of the wicker
man’s fire, and later the cool blue of moonlight. He’d held her to him, pleading.
 Don’t deny me, Jaina. Don’t ever deny me. Please.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 103
 I never would, Arthas. Never.
 Oh yes, powerful words, whispered in a powerful moment, but now, now when it really counted,
she had done exactly that—denied him and betrayed him. Dammit, she’d even agreed that if it were
her, she’d want to be killed outright before the plague came and twisted her into a violation of
everything good and true and natural. She’d left him, alone. If she’d stabbed him in the gut, he didn’t
think he could hurt worse.
 The thought came, brief and bright and sharp: Was she right?
 No. No, she couldn’t be. Because if she was right, then he was about to become a mass murderer,
and he knew that wasn’t who he was. He knew it.
 He shook off the dazed horror, licking lips suddenly gone dry, and took a deep breath. Some of the
men had departed with Uther. A lot of them. Too many, truth be told. Could he even take this city
with this few?
 “Sir, if I may,” Falric said, “I’m…well…I would rather be hacked into a thousand pieces than turn
into one of them undead.”
 There were murmurs of agreement and Arthas’s heart lifted. He grasped his hammer. “There is no
pleasure in what we do here,” he said, “only grim necessity. Only the need to halt the plague, here and
now, with the fewest casualties possible. Those within these walls are already dead. We know it, even if
they do not, and we must kill them quickly and cleanly before the plague does it for us.” He looked at
each of them in turn, these men who had not shirked their duty. “They must be slain, and their homes
destroyed, lest the dwellings become shelter for those whom we are too late to save.” The men nodded
their understanding, gripping their own weapons. “This is not a great and glorious battle. It is going to
be ugly and painful, and I regret its necessity with my whole heart. But it is with my whole heart that I
know we must do this.”
 He lifted his hammer. “For the Light!” he cried, and in answer his men roared and lifted their
weapons. He turned to the gate, took a deep breath, and charged in.
 The ones that had risen were easy. They were the enemy; human no longer, but vile caricatures of
what they had once been in life, and smashing their skulls or slicing their heads off was no more of a
hardship than putting down a rabid beast. The others—
 They looked up at the armed men, at their prince, in first confusion and then in terror. At first, most
of them didn’t even reach for weapons; they knew the tabards, knew that the men who had come to kill
them were supposed to be protecting them. They simply could not grasp why they were dying. Pain
clenched Arthas’s heart at the first one he struck down—a youth, barely out of puberty, who gazed up
at him with incomprehension in his brown eyes and got out the words, “My lord, why are—” before
Arthas cried out, as much in anguish at what he was being forced to do as anything else, and caved the
boy’s chest in with a hammer that he absently realized was no longer radiant with the Light. Perhaps
the Light, too, grieved the dire necessity of its actions. A sob ripped through him and he bit it back,
willed it back, and turned to the boy’s mother.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 104
 He thought it would get easier. It didn’t. It just got worse. Arthas refused to yield. The men looked
to him for an example; if he wavered, they would too, and then Mal’Ganis would triumph. So he kept
his helm on so they would not see his face, and himself lit the torches that burned down the buildings
full of screaming people locked inside, and refused to let the horrible sights and sounds slow him.
 It was a relief when some of the citizens of Stratholme began to fight back. Then the self- defense
instinct kicked in. They still did not have a chance against professional soldiers and a trained paladin.
But it mitigated that horrible sensation of—well, as Jaina had said, slaughtering them like farm
animals.
 “I’ve been waiting for you, young prince.”
 The voice was deep and shivered in his mind as well as his ears, resonant and…there was no other
word for it…evil. A dreadlord, Kel’Thuzad had said. A dark name for a dark being.
 “I am Mal’Ganis.”
 Something like joy shot through Arthas. He was vindicated. Mal’Ganis was here, he was behind the
plague, and even as Arthas’s men, who also heard the voice, turned and sought the source, the doors of
a house where villagers had been hiding was flung open and walking corpses hastened out, their bodies
limned by a green, sickly glow.
 “As you can see, your people are now mine. I will now turn this city household by household, until
the flame of life has been snuffed out…forever.” Mal’Ganis laughed. The sound was unsettling, deep
and raw and dark.
 “I won’t allow it, Mal’Ganis!” Arthas cried. His heart swelled with the rightness of what he was
doing. “Better that these people die by my hand than serve as your slaves in death!”
 More laughter, and then the disturbing presence was gone as swiftly as it had come, and Arthas was
busy battling for his very life as a throng of undead, three deep, charged him.
 How long it took to slaughter every living—and dead—person in the city, Arthas would never be
able to tell. But at last it was done. He was exhausted, shaking, nauseated by the smell of blood,
smoke, and the sick, sweet scent of poisoned bread, hanging in the air even though the bakery itself
was a burning building. Blood and ichor covered his once- bright armor. But he was not done. He
waited for what he knew would come, and sure enough, a mere moment later, his enemy arrived,
descending from the air to land on the roof of one of the few buildings still intact.
 Arthas staggered. The creature was enormous. His skin was blue- gray, like animated stone. Horns
curved forward and up from his bald skull, and two mighty wings like those of bats stretched out
behind him like living shadows. His legs, encased in metal adorned with spikes and decorated with
disturbing images of bones and skulls, curved backward and ended in hooves, and the very light of his
glowing green eyes revealed sharp teeth bared in an arrogant sneer.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 105
 He stared up at the creature, rapt with horror, disbelief warring with the evidence before his eyes.
He had heard tales; had seen pictures in old books, both in the library at home and in the Dalaran
archives. But beholding this monstrous thing, towering over him, the sky behind him crimson and
black with fire and smoke—
 A dreadlord was a demon. A thing out of myth. It couldn’t be real—and yet it was here, standing
before him in all its dreadful glory.
 Dreadlord.
 Fear threatened to overwhelm Arthas, and he knew if he let it it would cripple him. He would die at
the hand of this monster—die without even a fight. And so with sheer will, he drowned out the
mindless terror with another, better emotion. Hatred. Righteous fury. He thought of those who had
fallen beneath his hammer, the living and the dead, the ravening ghouls and the terrified women and
children who didn’t understand that he was trying to save their souls. Their faces bolstered him; they
could not—would not—have died for nothing. Somehow Arthas found the courage to meet the demon
stare for stare, clutching his hammer.
 “We’re going to finish this right now, Mal’Ganis,” he shouted. His voice was strong and firm. “Just
you and me.”
 The dreadlord threw back his head and laughed. “Brave words,” he rumbled. “Unfortunately for
you, it won’t end here.” Mal’Ganis grinned, black lips pulling back from sharp, pointed teeth. “Your
journey has just begun, young prince.”
 He swept an arm out, indicating Arthas’s men, long, sharp claws glittering in the light of the flames
that still burned and consumed the great city. “Gather your forces and meet me in the arctic land of
Northrend. It is there that your true destiny will unfold.”
 “My true destiny?” Arthas’s voice cracked with anger and confusion. “What do you—” The words
died in his throat as the air around Mal’Ganis began to shimmer and whirl in a familiar pattern.
 “No!” Arthas shrieked. He surged forward, blindly, recklessly, and would have been cut down in a
heartbeat had not the teleportation spell been completed. Arthas cried out incoherently, swinging his
faintly glowing hammer at empty air. “I’ll hunt you down to the ends of the earth if I have to! Do you
hear me? To the ends of the earth!”
 Manic, raging, screaming, he swung his hammer wildly at nothing until sheer exhaustion alone
forced him to lower it. He propped it up and leaned on it, sweating, shaking with raw sobs of
frustration and anger.
 To the ends of the earth.
 World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 CHAPTER THIRTEEN
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 106
 Three days later, Lady Jaina Proudmoore walked the streets of what had once been a proud city,
the glory of northern Lordaeron. Now, it was the stuff of nightmares.
 The stench was almost unbearable. She lifted a handkerchief, liberally scented with peacebloom
essence, to her face in a partially successful attempt to filter out the worst of it. Fires that ought to have
consumed themselves, or have abated at least slightly from lack of fuel, continued to rage at their full
height, telling Jaina that some dark magic was afoot. Combined with the acrid smell of smoke that
stung her eyes and throat was the reek of putrefaction.
 They lay as they had fallen, most of them unarmed. Tears welled in Jaina’s eyes and slipped down
her cheeks as she moved as if in a trance, carefully stepping over the bloated bodies. A soft whimper of
pain escaped as she saw that Arthas and his men, in their misguided mercy, had not even spared the
children.
 Would these bodies, lying still and stiff in death, have risen to attack her if Arthas had not slain
them? Perhaps. Many of them, certainly; the grain had indeed been distributed and consumed. But
every single one? She would never know, nor would he.
 “Jaina—I ask you again, come with me.” His voice was intense, but it was clear his mind was a
thousand leagues away. “He escaped me. I saved the city’s inhabitants from becoming his slaves, but—
at the last minute he got away. He’s in Northrend. Come with me.”
 Jaina closed her eyes. She did not want to remember that conversation of a day and a half ago. She
did not want to remember how he looked, cold and angry and distant, fixated on killing this dreadlord
—Light, a demon—at the expense of everything else.
 She stumbled across a body and her eyes snapped open again to the horror that the man she had
loved—still did love, despite everything, how she could still love him after this she did not know, but
Light save her, she did—
 “Arthas—it’s a trap. He’s a demon lord. If he was powerful enough to elude you in St- Stratholme,
he will certainly defeat you in his own territory, where he is strongest. Don’t go…please…”
 She had wanted to throw herself into his arms, physically keep him there beside her. He couldn’t go
to Northrend. He would be going to his death. And although he had dealt out so much to others,
Jaina found she could not wish for his.
 “So much death,” she murmured. “I can’t believe Arthas could’ve done this.” And yet she knew he
had. A whole city…
 “Jaina? Jaina Proudmoore!”
 Jaina started violently, snapped out of her sickened trance by the sound of the familiar voice. Uther.
A strange feeling of relief swept over her as she turned in the direction of the hail. Uther had always
intimidated her slightly; he was so large and powerful and…well…so deeply entrenched in the Light.
She recalled with an incongruously guilty flush how, when she and Arthas were younger, they used to
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 107
make fun of Uther’s piety, which to them verged on the pompous and sanctimonious, behind the
knight’s back. He was a fairly easy target. But three excruciating days ago, she and Uther had both
stood against Arthas.
 “You swore you would never deny me, Jaina,” Arthas accused, his voice sharp as an icy knife blade.
“But when I most needed your support, your understanding, you turned against me.”
 “I—you—Arthas, we didn’t know enough to—”
 “And now, you refuse to aid me. I’m going to Northrend, Jaina. I would have you with me. To help
me stop this evil. Won’t you come?”
 Jaina winced. Uther noticed, but said nothing. Clad in full plate armor despite the overwhelming
heat of the unnaturally blazing fires, he strode swiftly toward her. His stature and presence was now a
picture of strength and solidity rather than intimidation to her. He did not embrace her, but did grasp
her arms reassuringly.
 “I thought I might find you here. Where has he gone, girl? Where has Arthas taken the fleet?”
 Jaina’s eyes widened. “The fleet?”
 Uther grunted an affirmation. “He’s commandeered the entire Lordaeron fleet and taken off with
them. Sent only the briefest message to his own father. We don’t know why they obeyed without direct
orders from their commanders.”
 Jaina gave him a small, sad smile. “Because he’s their prince. He’s Arthas. They love him. They
didn’t know about…this.”
 A flicker of pain crossed Uther’s rugged features and he nodded. “Aye,” he said softly. “He’s always
been good to the men who serve him. They can tell that he genuinely cares about them, and they’ll
serve him with their lives.”
 Regret laced the words. They were true, insofar as they went, and once Arthas had deserved such
undying devotion.
 “And now you refuse to aid me….”
 Uther shook her gently, bringing her back to the present. “Do you know where he might have taken
them, child?”
 Jaina took a deep breath. “He came to me before he left. I pleaded with him not to go. I told him it
sounded like a trap—”
 “Where?” Uther was relentless.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 108
 “Northrend. He’s gone to Northrend to hunt Mal’Ganis—the demon lord who is responsible for the
plague. He couldn’t defeat him…here.”
 “A demon lord? Damn that boy!” The outburst startled Jaina. “I’ve got to inform Terenas.”
 “I tried to stop him,” Jaina repeated. “Then…and when he…” She gestured helplessly at the almost
inconceivable number of dead that kept them silent company. She wondered for the thousandth time if
she could have stopped it—if she had found the right words, touched Arthas the right way, if he would
have been swayed. “But I failed.”
 I failed you, Arthas. I failed these people—I failed myself.
 Uther’s heavy, gauntleted hand dropped on her slim shoulder. “Don’t be too hard on yourself, girl.”
 She laughed humorlessly. “Is it that obvious?”
 “Anyone with a heart would wonder the same. I know I do.” She glanced up at him, startled at the
admission.
 “You do?” Jaina asked.
 He nodded, his eyes bloodshot from exhaustion, and there was a pain in those depths that struck
her to the core. “I could not fight him. He is still my prince. But I wonder…could I have stood in his
path? Said something else, done something else?” Uther sighed and shook his head. “Perhaps. Perhaps
not. But that moment is in the past and my choices cannot be undone. You and I must both look to the
future now. Jaina Proudmoore, you had nothing to do with this…slaughter. Thank you for telling me
where he has gone.”
 She lowered her head. “I feel like I’ve betrayed him again.”
 “Jaina, you may have saved him—and all the men who are going with him in ignorance of what he’s
become.”
 Startled at his choice of words, she looked up sharply. “What he’s become? He’s still Arthas, Uther!”
 Uther’s eyes looked haunted. “Aye, he is. But he made a dreadful choice—and one with
repercussions we’ve yet to see played out. I don’t know that he can come back from this.” Uther turned
and eyed the dead. “We know the dead can be raised to unlife. That demons truly exist. Now I wonder
if there are such things as ghosts, too. If there are, our prince will be ten thick in them.” He bowed to
her. “Come away from this place, lady.”
 She shook her head. “No, not yet. I’m not ready.”
 He searched her eyes, then nodded. “As you will. Light be with you, Lady Jaina Proudmoore.”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 109
 “And you, Uther the Lightbringer.” She gave him the best smile she could muster and watched as
he strode off. Arthas would no doubt see this as yet another betrayal, but if it saved his life—then she
could live with that.
 The smell was starting to become more than even her stubborn will would permit her to handle.
She paused for a last look. Part of her wondered why she had come here; the other part knew. She had
come to brand these images into her brain, to understand the depth of what had happened. She must
never, ever forget. Whether or not Arthas was past reaching, she didn’t know, but what happened here
would need to never become a footnote in the history books.
 A raven wheeled down slowly. She wanted to rush forward and shoo it away, to try to protect the
poor, battered corpses, but it was only doing what its nature told it to do. It did not have a conscience
to tell it that what it was doing was offensive to human sensibilities. She looked at the raven for a
moment, and then her eyes widened.
 It began to shift, change, grow, and in an instant, where a carrion bird had once perched stood a
man. She gasped in recognition—this same prophet she had seen twice before.
 “You!”
 He inclined his head, and gave her an odd smile that told her without words, I recognize you, too.
This was the third time she had seen him—once when he was speaking with Antonidas, and once with
Arthas. She had been invisible on both occasions—and clearly, her invisibility spell had not fooled him
for a moment, either time.
 “The dead in this land might lie still for the time being, but don’t be fooled. Your prince will find
only death in the cold north.”
 His blunt words made her flinch slightly. “Arthas is only doing what he believes is right.” The words
were true, and she knew it. Whatever his failings were, he had been utterly sincere in his belief that the
purging of Stratholme was the only option.
 The prophet’s gaze softened. “Commendable as that may be,” he said, “his passions will be his
undoing. It falls to you now, young sorceress.”
 “What? Me?”
 “Antonidas has dismissed me. Terenas and Arthas as well. Both rulers of men and masters of magic
have turned their faces from true understanding. But I think you may not.”
 The aura of power around him was palpable. Jaina could almost see it, swirling about him, heady
and strong. He stepped closer to her and placed his hand on her shoulder. She gazed up into his eyes,
confused.
 “You must lead your people west to the ancient lands of Kalimdor. Only there can you combat the
shadow and save this world from the flame.”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 110
 Staring into those eyes, Jaina knew he was right. There was no control, no compelling—just a
knowing, deep and certain and down to her bones.
 “I—” Swallowing hard, she took one last look at the horrors wrought by the man she loved and still
did love, and nodded.
 “I will do as you say.”
 And leave my Arthas to the destiny he has chosen. There is no other way.
 “It will take time, to gather them all. To make them believe me.”
 “I do not know that you have that much time left. So much of it has already been squandered.”
 Jaina lifted her chin. “I cannot go without trying. If you know so much about me, then surely you
must know that.”
 The raven prophet seemed to relax marginally and smiled at her, squeezing her shoulder. “Do what
you feel you must, but do not tarry overlong. The hourglass empties swiftly, and delay could be deadly.”
 She nodded, too overcome to speak. So many to talk to—Antonidas’s chief among them. If he
would listen to anyone, she thought, it would be her. She would bear witness for these dead—for the
folly of not retreating to Kalimdor while the living yet walked here.
 The prophet’s form dwindled and shifted, becoming once again that of the large black bird, and he
flew off with a rustle of wings. And somehow as it brushed her face, the wind from those black wings
did not smell of carrion, or smoke, or death. It smelled clean and fresh.
 It smelled of hope.
 World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 CHAPTER FOURTEEN
 Northrend was the name of the land, Daggercap Bay the site where the Lordaeron fleet made
harbor. The water, deep and choppy with an unforgiving wind, was a cold blue- gray. Sheer cliffs were
dotted with tenacious pine trees soaring upward, providing a natural defense of the small, flat area
where Arthas and his men would make camp. A waterfall tumbled down, crashing in a billow of spray
from a great height. It was all in all more pleasant a place than he had expected, at least for the
moment; certainly not the obvious home for a demon lord.
 Arthas leaped from the boat and slogged onto the shore, his eyes darting about, absorbing
everything. The wind, keening like a lost child, stirred his long blond hair, caressing it with cold
fingers. Beside him, one of the captains of the ships he had commandeered without consulting his
father shivered and clapped his hands together, trying to warm them.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 111
 “This is a Light- forsaken land, isn’t it? You can barely even see the sun! This howling wind cuts to
the bone and you’re not even shaking.”
 Vaguely surprised, Arthas realized that the man was right. He felt the cold—felt it knifing into him
—but he did not tremble.
 “Milord, are you all right?”
 “Captain, are all my forces accounted for?” Arthas didn’t bother to answer the question. It was a
foolish one. Of course he wasn’t all right. He had been forced to slaughter the populace of an entire city
in order to stop a worse atrocity. Jaina and Uther had both turned their backs on him. And a demon
lord was awaiting his arrival.
 “Nearly. There are only a few ships that—”
 “Very well. Our first priority is to set up a base camp with proper defenses. There’s no telling what’s
waiting for us out there in the shadows.” There, that would shut the man up and give him something to
do. Arthas lent his assistance, working as hard as the men he commanded to erect basic shelter. He
missed Jaina’s handiness with flames as they lit fires against the encroaching darkness and cold. Hell,
he missed Jaina. But he would learn not to. She failed him when he most needed her, and he would not
hold such people in his heart any longer. It needed to be strong, not soft; determined, not aching.
There was no place in it for weakness, if he would defeat Mal’Ganis. There was no place in it for
warmth.
 The night passed without incident. Arthas stayed awake in his tent until the small hours of the
morning, perusing what incomplete maps he had been able to find. When at last he fell asleep, he
dreamed, and it was both joyous and nightmarish. He was again a youth, with everything in the world
to look forward to, riding the glorious white horse he so loved. Again, they were one, perfectly paired,
and nothing would stop them. And even as he dreamed, Arthas felt the horror descend upon him as he
urged Invincible to make the fatal jump. The anguish, not in the slightest abated by the fact that this
was a mere dream and he knew it as such, ripped through him yet again. And again, he drew his sword,
and stabbed his devoted friend through his heart.
 But this time…this time he realized that he was holding a completely different sword than the
simple, basic weapon he had held at that dreadful moment. This time the sword was huge, two
handed, beautifully fashioned. Runes glowed along its length. Cool blue mist wafted from it, cold as
the snow in which Invincible lay. And when he withdrew the sword, Arthas did not find himself
staring at a slain beast. Instead Invincible whickered and leaped to his feet, completely healed,
somehow stronger than before. He seemed to glow now, his coat radiant rather than merely white, and
Arthas bolted upright from where he had fallen asleep over the maps, tears in his eyes and a sob of joy
on his lips. Surely, this was an omen.
 The morning dawned frigid and gray, and he was up before first light, eager to begin combing the
land for signs of the dreadlord. He was here; Arthas knew it.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 112
 But that first day, they found nothing more than a few pockets of undead. As the days passed, with
more and more territory charted, Arthas’s spirits started to sink.
 Intellectually, he realized that Northrend was a vast continent, barely explored. Mal’Ganis was a
dreadlord, yes, and the clusters of undead they had found thus far would likely be a good indicator of
his presence. But not the only one. He could be anywhere—or nowhere. This whole revelation that he
would be in Northrend could have been nothing more than an elaborate trick to get Arthas out of his
way, so that the demon could move somewhere else entirely and—
 No. That way lay madness. The dreadlord was arrogant, certain he would eventually best the
human prince. Arthas had to believe he was here. Had to. Of course, that could also mean that Jaina
had been right. That Mal’Ganis was indeed here, and had laid a trap for him. None of these thoughts
was pleasant, and the more Arthas chewed on them, the more agitated he became.
 It was well into the second week of searching before Arthas found anything to offer him hope. They
had marched off in a different direction, after the initial pair of scouts returned bearing news of large
clusters of undead. They found the reported undead—lying in pieces on the frozen earth. Before
Arthas could even form a thought, he and his men had come under fire.
 “Take cover!” Arthas cried, and they dove for whatever they could find—tree, rock, even snowbanks.
Almost as soon as it had started, the attack ceased and a shout rang out.
 “Bloody hell! Ye’re not undead! Ye’re all alive!”
 It was a voice that Arthas recognized and had never thought to encounter in this desolate land.
Only one person he knew could swear so enthusiastically, and for a moment, he forgot why he was
here, what he was searching for, and felt only delight and fond remembrance of a time long past.
 “Muradin?” Arthas cried in shock and pleasure. “Muradin Bronzebeard, is that you?”
 The stout dwarf stepped out from behind the row of weapons, peering cautiously. The scowl on his
face was replaced by an enormous grin. “Arthas, lad! I never imagined that ye’d be th’ one tae come tae
our rescue!”
 He strode forward, his face even more hidden by the bushy beard Arthas remembered from his
youth, if such a thing was possible, his eyes more lined but now twinkling with pleasure. He spread his
arms, marched up to Arthas, and embraced the prince about the waist. Arthas laughed—Light, it had
been so long since he had laughed—and hugged his old friend and trainer back. As they drew apart,
the meaning of Muradin’s words registered on Arthas.
 “Rescue? Muradin, I didn’t even know you were here. I came to—” He snapped his mouth closed on
the words. He didn’t know how Muradin would react yet, and so simply smiled at the dwarf. “That can
all wait,” he said instead. “Come, my old friend. We’ve got a base camp set up not too far from here.
Looks like you and your men could use a hot meal.”
 “If ye have ale as well, that’d be a yes from me,” Muradin grinned.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 113
 There was a celebratory air as Arthas, Muradin, his second in command Baelgun, and the other
dwarves marched into camp that even managed to take a slight edge off the never- ending cold of the
place. Arthas knew that dwarves were used to cold climates and were a solid, strong people, but he
noted the looks of relief and gratitude that flitted across the bearded faces as they were handed bowls
of steaming hot stew. It was difficult, but Arthas bit his tongue against the questions that wanted to
come pouring out of him until Muradin and his men were taken care of. He then beckoned Muradin to
join him a ways away from the center of the camp, near where his own personal tent was set up.
 “So,” he said, as his former trainer began shoveling hot food down with the regularity and seemingly
unstoppable quality of a well- built gnomish machine, “what were you doing up here anyway?”
 Muradin swallowed his bite of food and reached for some ale to wash it down with. “Well, lad, this
isn’t necessarily something tae be sharin’ wi’ everyone.”
 Arthas nodded his understanding. Only a few of the members of the fleet he’d commandeered knew
the whole story of why they were in Northrend. “I appreciate your trusting me, Muradin.”
 The dwarf clapped him on the shoulder. “Ye’ve grown up right bonny, ye have, lad. If ye can find yer
way tae this forsaken land, ye’ve a right tae know what me and me men are doing here. I’m looking fer a
legend.” His eyes twinkled as he gulped some ale, wiped his mouth and continued. “My people have
always been interested in rare items, ye ken tha’.”
 “Indeed.” Arthas recalled hearing something about Muradin helping to form something called the
Explorer’s League. It was based in Ironforge, and its members traveled the world to gather knowledge
and search for archeological treasures. “So you’re on League business here?”
 “Aye, indeed. I’ve been here many times before. Oddly compelling land, this one. Doesn’t give up its
secrets easily…an’ that makes it intriguin’.” He fished in his pack and came out with a leather- bound
journal that looked like it had seen better days and shoved it at Arthas with a grunt. The prince took it
and began to thumb through the pages. There were hundreds of sketches of creatures, landmarks, and
ruins. “There’s more here than meets the eye at first glance.”
 Looking at the images, Arthas was forced to agree. “Most of the time, it’s just research,” Muradin
continued. “Learnin’.”
 Arthas closed the book and gave it back to Muradin. “When you saw us you were surprised—not
that we were undead, but that we weren’t. How long have you been here—and what is it you’ve
learned?”
 Muradin scraped the last bit of stew from his bowl, wiped it clean with a hunk of bread, and ate that
as well. He sighed a little. “Ah, I do miss th’ pastries yer palace baker used tae make.” He fished for his
pipe. “An’ in answer tae yer question, long enough to know that something is amiss here. There’s
some…force growin’. It’s bad and it’s getting badder. I talked to yer father; I think this power is nae
happy with just sitting here in Northrend.”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 114
 Arthas fought back a double rush of both worry and excitement, trying to appear composed. “You
think it might pose a danger to my people?”
 Muradin leaned back and lit the pipe. The smell of his preferred tobacco, its familiarity comforting
in this alien land, teased Arthas’s nostrils. “Aye, I do. I think it’s part o’ the creation o’ these pesky
undead.”
 Arthas decided it was time to share what he knew. He spoke quickly but calmly, telling Muradin
about the plagued grain. About Kel’Thuzad, and the Cult of the Damned, and his own first horrifying
encounter with the transformed farmers. About learning that Mal’Ganis, a dreadlord in the flesh, was
the one behind the plague, and about the demon’s taunting invitation to come here to Northrend.
 He mentioned Stratholme obliquely. “The plague had reached even there,” he said. “I made sure
that Mal’Ganis had no more corpses to use for his own sick purposes.” That was enough; it was all
true, and he was not certain that Muradin would understand the awful necessity of what Arthas had
been forced to do. Jaina and Uther certainly hadn’t, and they’d actually seen what Arthas had been up
against.
 Muradin grunted. “Bad business, that. Perhaps this certain artifact I’m lookin’ fer can be of use to
you in fighting this dreadlord. As far as rare an’ magical things go, this one’s a beaut. Information about
it has only recently begun to surface, but ever since we learned about it—well, we’ve been looking long
and hard. Have a few special magical items tae try an’ track it down, but no luck yet.” He lifted his eyes
from Arthas and looked beyond the prince, toward the wilderness that loomed. For a moment, the
twinkle in his eyes abated, replaced by a somberness that the more youthful Arthas had never seen
there.
 Arthas waited, burning with curiosity, but not wanting to appear the impatient child Muradin no
doubt remembered him as being.
 Muradin refocused, regarding Arthas intently. “We’re searching for a runeblade called
Frostmourne.”
 Frostmourne. Arthas felt a slight shiver in his soul at the word. An ominous name, for a weapon of
legend. Runeblades were not unheard of, but they were extremely rare and terribly powerful weapons.
He glanced over at his hammer, sitting propped up against a tree where he’d placed it after returning
from his discovery of Muradin. It was a beautiful weapon, and he had cherished it, although recently
the Light seemed to shine from it sluggishly, sometimes not at all.
 But a runeblade—
 A sudden certainty seized him, as if fate were whispering in his ear. Northrend was a vast place.
Surely it was not coincidence that he had encountered Muradin. If he had Frostmourne—surely he
could slay Mal’Ganis. End this plague. Save his people. The dwarf and he had come together for a
reason. It was destiny at work.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 115
 Muradin was speaking and Arthas jerked his attention back to him. “We came here tae recover
Frostmourne, but the closer we come tae doin’ so, the more undead we encounter. And I’m too old tae
think that mere coincidence.”
 Arthas smiled softly. So Muradin, too, did not believe in coincidence. The certainty inside his gut
grew. “You think Mal’Ganis doesn’t want us to find it,” Arthas murmured.
 “I wouldna think that he’d be happy tae see ye charging at him wi’ that kind o’ weapon in yer fist,
that’s true enough.”
 “It sounds like we can help each other, then,” Arthas said. “We’ll help you and your League find
Frostmourne, and you can help us against Mal’Ganis.”
 “A sound plan,” Muradin agreed, the smoke writhing up about him in fragrant blue- black plumes.
“Arthas, me lad…any more o’ that ale available?”
 The days passed. Muradin and Arthas compared notes. They had a double quest now—Mal’Ganis
and the runeblade. Eventually they decided that the wisest course of action would be to press inward
and send the fleet northward, to establish a new camp there. They found themselves fighting not only
undead, but famished and vicious packs of wolves, strange beings that seemed to be part wolverine and
part human, and a race of trolls that seemed as at home here in the frigid north as their cousins did in
the steamy jungles of Stranglethorn. Muradin was not as surprised as the human prince to find such
beings; apparently small clusters of similar so- called “ice trolls” lurked near the dwarven capital of
Ironforge.
 Arthas learned from Muradin that the undead had bases here; strange, ziggurat- like structures,
pulsing with dark magic, that had belonged to an older and presumably extinct race, since the former
residents didn’t seem to object. So not only did the walking corpses themselves need to be destroyed,
their refuges needed to be as well. Yet each day seemed to bring Arthas no nearer to his goal. There
were plenty of traces of Mal’Ganis’s evil, but none of the dreadlord himself.
 Nor was Muradin’s quest for the enticing Frostmourne more successful. The clues, arcane and
mundane both, were narrowing the search area, but thus far, the runeblade remained only a legend for
all the reality it held for them.
 The day when things changed, Arthas was in a foul temper. He was returning to their makeshift
traveling camp, hungry and tired and cold, after yet another fruitless foray. So lost in his irritation was
he that it was several seconds before comprehension dawned.
 The guards were not at their posts. “What the—” He turned to look at Muradin, who immediately
gripped his axe. There were no bodies, of course; if the undead had attacked while he was away, the
corpses would have been raised in the cruelest example of conscription the world had ever known. But
there should have been blood, signs of a struggle…but there was none.
 They advanced cautiously, quietly. The camp was deserted—packed up, even, save for a handful of
men. They looked up as Arthas entered and saluted him. In answer to his unvoiced question, one
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 116
captain, Luc Valonforth, said, “Apologies, milord. Your father had our troops recalled at Lord Uther’s
request. The expedition is cancelled.”
 A muscle twitched near Arthas’s eye. “My father—recalled my troops. Because Lord Uther told him
to?”
 The captain looked nervous and glanced sideways at Muradin, then replied, “Aye, sir. We wanted
to wait for you but the emissary was quite insistent. All the men headed northwest to meet up with the
fleet. Our scout informed us that the roads, such as they are, are being held by the undead, so they’re
busy clearing a path through the woods. I’m sure you’ll be able to catch up with them quickly, sir.”
 “Of course,” Arthas said, and forced a smile. Inwardly he was seething. “Excuse me a moment.” He
dropped a hand on Muradin’s shoulder and steered the dwarf off to an area where they could speak
quietly.
 “Eh, I’m sorry, lad. It’s frustrating tae have tae pick up an—”
 “No.”
 Muradin blinked. “Come again?”
 “I’m not going back. Muradin, if my warriors abandon me, I’ll never defeat Mal’Ganis! That plague
won’t ever stop!” Despite himself, his voice rose at the last word and a few curious glances were thrown
his way.
 “Lad, it’s yer father. The king. Ye can’t countermand an order. That’s treason.”
 Arthas snorted. Perhaps it is my father who is turning traitor to his own people, he thought, but did
not say.
 “I stripped Uther of his rank. I dissolved the order. He’s got no right to do this. Father has been
deceived.”
 “Well, then, ye’ll have tae’ take it up wi’ him when ye get back. Make him see reason, if it’s all as ye say
it is. But ye canna disobey.”
 Arthas shot the dwarf a harsh glance. If it’s all as I say it is? What, was the damned dwarf implying
that Arthas was lying to him? “You’re right about one thing. My men are loyal to what they understand
as the chain of command. They’d never refuse to go home if they had direct orders.” He rubbed his chin
thoughtfully, and smiled as the idea took shape. “That’s it! We’ll simply deny them the way to get home.
They won’t be disobeying—they’ll simply be unable to obey.”
 Muradin’s bushy brows drew together in a frown. “What are ye saying?”
 For answer, Arthas gave him a wolfish grin and told him his plan.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 117
 Muradin seemed shocked. “Isn’t that a bit much, lad?” Muradin’s tone told him that he thought it
was indeed a bit much, perhaps a whole hell of a lot more than a “bit.” Arthas ignored him. Muradin
hadn’t seen what he had seen; hadn’t been forced to do what he had done. He would understand, soon
enough. When they finally faced Mal’Ganis. Arthas knew that he would defeat the dreadlord. He had
to. He would end the plague, end the threat to his people. Then the destruction of the vessels would be
nothing more than an inconvenience—comparatively minor when measured against the survival of the
citizens of Lordaeron.
 “I know it sounds drastic, but it has to be this way. It has to.”

 A few hours later, Arthas stood on the Forgotten Shore and watched his entire fleet burn.
 The answer had been simple. The men could not take the ships home—could not abandon him—if
there were no ships to take. And so Arthas had burned them all.
 He had cut through the woods, hiring mercenaries first to help them slaughter the undead and then
to douse the wooden vessels liberally with oil and set them aflame. In this land of constant cold and
feeble light, the heat coming off the fiery vessels was disconcertingly welcome. Arthas lifted his hand to
shield his eyes from the brightness.
 Beside him, Muradin sighed and shook his head. He and the other dwarves, who muttered under
their breaths as they watched the conflagration, were still not certain this was the right path. Arthas
folded his arms, his back cold, his face and front almost scorched with the heat, solemnly watching the
flaming skeleton of one of the ships crack apart with a whumph.
 “Damn Uther for making me do this!” he murmured.
 He would show the paladin—the former paladin. He would show Uther, and Jaina, and his father.
He had not shirked his duty, no matter how awful or brutal it was. He would return triumphant,
having done what needed to be done—things that the softer- hearted had cringed from doing. And
because of him, because of his willingness to shoulder the burden of responsibility, his people would
survive.
 So loud was the sound of flames licking at the oil- drenched wood that for a moment, it drowned
out the despairing cries of the men as they emerged and beheld the sight.
 “Prince Arthas! Our ships!”
 “What happened? How are we getting home?”
 The idea had been simmering in the back of his mind for several hours now. Arthas knew his men
would be aghast at discovering that they were stranded here. They had agreed to follow him, true, but
Muradin had been right. They would have seen orders from his father as superseding any order he
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 118
could give them. And Mal’Ganis would have won. But they would not understand how very badly they
needed to stop the threat here, now—
 His eyes fell on the mercenaries he had hired.
 No one would miss them.
 They could be bought and sold. If someone had paid them to kill him, they would have done so as
readily as helping him. So many had died—good people, noble people, innocents. Their senseless
deaths cried out to be avenged. And if Arthas’s men were not with him with all their hearts, he would
not triumph.
 Arthas could not bear it.
 “Quickly, my warriors!” he cried, lifting his hammer. It did not glow with the Light; he was starting
to cease expecting it to. He pointed at the mercenaries just now dragging the small boats filled with
supplies ashore from the burning ships. “These murderous creatures have burned our ships and robbed
you of your way home! Slay them all in the name of Lordaeron!”
 And he led the charge.
 World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 CHAPTER FIFTEEN
 Arthas recognized the sound of Muradin’s short but heavy stride even before the dwarf yanked the
tent flap back and glared at him. They stared at each other for a long moment, then Muradin jerked his
head toward the outside and let the flap fall. For a moment, Arthas was hurtled back in time to when
he was a child accidentally flinging a training sword across the room. He frowned and rose, following
Muradin to an area far away from the men.
 The dwarf didn’t mince words. “Ye lied tae yer men and betrayed the mercenaries who fought for
ye!” Muradin snapped, shoving his face up to Arthas’s as best he could from his much shorter height.
“That’s nae the lad I trained. That’s nae the man who was inducted into th’ order of the Silver Hand.
That’s nae King Terenas’s boy.”
 “I am no one’s boy,” Arthas spat, shoving Muradin away. “I did what I deemed necessary.”
 He half expected Muradin to strike him, but instead the anger seemed to bleed away from his old
trainer. “What’s happening tae ye, Arthas?” Muradin said quietly, his voice holding a world of pain and
confusion. “Is vengeance all that’s important to ye?”
 “Spare me, Muradin,” Arthas growled. “You weren’t there to see what Mal’Ganis did to my
homeland. What he did to innocent men, women, and children!”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 119
 “I’ve heard what ye did,” Muradin said quietly. “Some o’ yer men have been a wee bit free wi’ their
tongues when ale has loosened them. I know what I think—but I also know that I canna judge ye. Ye’re
right, I wasn’t there. Thank the Light, I didn’t have tae make that kind o’ decision. But even so—
something’s happening. Ye—”
 Mortar fire and cries of alarm interrupted him. In a heartbeat, Muradin and Arthas had their
weapons out and had turned back to the encampment. The men were still scrambling for weapons.
Falric was barking orders to the humans, while Baelgun was organizing the dwarves. There came the
sound of engagement from outside the encampment, and Arthas could see the press of undead closing
in. His hands clenched on his hammer. This had all the earmarks of a coordinated attack, rather than a
random encounter.
 “The Dark Lord said you would come,” came a voice that was by now familiar to Arthas. Elation
filled him. Mal’Ganis was here! It had not been a wild- goose chase after all. “This is where your
journey ends, boy. Trapped and freezing at the roof of the world, with only death to sing the tale of
your doom.”
 Muradin scratched his beard, his sharp eyes darting about. Outside the perimeter of the camp came
the sounds of battle. “This looks bad,” he admitted with characteristic dwarven understatement. “We’re
completely surrounded.”
 Arthas stared, agonized. “We could have done it,” he whispered. “With Frostmourne…we could
have done it.”
 Muradin glanced away. “There…well lad, I have been having me doubts. About th’ sword. And, tae
speak truly, about ye as well.”
 It took a second for Arthas to realize what Muradin was saying. “You—are you telling me you’ve
figured out how to find it?”
 At Muradin’s nod, Arthas seized him by the arm. “Whatever your doubts, Muradin, you can’t
possibly have them now. Not with Mal’Ganis right here. If you know where it is, then take me to it.
Help me claim Frostmourne! You said it yourself—you didn’t think that Mal’Ganis would like to see
me with Frostmourne in my fist. Mal’Ganis has more troops than we do. Without Frostmourne, we’ll
fall, you know we will!”
 Muradin gave him an agonized look, then closed his eyes.
 “I have a bad feeling about this, lad. It’s why I’ve nae pressed on before—something about this
artifact, how the information has come—it doesnae feel right. But I promised I’d see this through. Ye
go gather a few men and I’ll find ye that runeblade.”
 Arthas clapped his old friend on the shoulder. This was it. I’ll get that damned runeblade, and I’ll
shove it through your black heart, dreadlord. I’ll make you pay.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 120
 “Close that gap over there!” Falric was shouting. “Davan, fire!” The boom of mortar fire echoed
through the camp as Arthas raced toward his second in command.
 “Captain Falric!”
 Falric turned to him. “Sir…we’re utterly surrounded. We can hold out for a while, but eventually
they’re going to wear us down. Who—what—we lose in numbers, they’ll gain.”
 “I know, Captain. Muradin and I are going to go find Frostmourne.” Falric’s eyes widened slightly
in both shock and hope. Arthas had shared the knowledge of the sword—and its supposed vast power
—with a few of his most trusted men. “Once we have it, victory will be certain. Can you buy us the
time?”
 “Aye, Your Highness.” Falric grinned, but he still looked worried even as he said, “We’ll hold these
undead bastards off.”
 A few moments later, Muradin, armed with a map and a strange glowing object, joined Arthas and
a handful of men. His mouth was etched in a frown and his eyes were unhappy, but his body was
straight. Falric gave the signal, and began to create a distraction. Most of the undead suddenly turned
and concentrated their efforts on him, leaving the back area of the camp open.
 “Let’s go,” Arthas said grimly.

 Muradin barked out directions as he alternately peered at his map and at the glowing object that
seemed to pulse erratically. They moved as quickly as possible through the deep snow where he
indicated, stopping only occasionally for the briefests of breaks to reassess. The sky darkened as clouds
gathered. Snow began to fall, slowing them further.
 Arthas began to move automatically. The snow made it impossible to see more than a few feet
ahead. He no longer noticed or cared in which direction he went, simply moving his legs as he followed
Muradin’s lead. Time seemed to have no meaning. He could have been moving for minutes or days.
 His mind was consumed with thoughts of Frostmourne. Their salvation. Arthas knew it would be.
But could they reach it before his men at the camp fell to the undead and their demonic master? Falric
had said they could hold—for a time. How much longer? To finally know that Mal’Ganis was here—at
his own base camp—and to not be able to attack was—
 “There,” Muradin said, almost reverently, pointing. “It’s inside there.”
 Arthas halted, blinking eyes that were narrowed to slits against the driving snow, their lashes
crusted with ice. They stood before the mouth of a cavern, stark and ominous- seeming in the snowswirled darkness of the gray day. There was some kind of illumination inside, a soft, blue- green
radiance he could just barely glimpse. Bone- weary, frozen as he was, excitement shot through him. He
forced his numbed mouth to form words.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 121
 “Frostmourne…and the end of Mal’Ganis. The end of the plague. Come on!”
 A second wind seemed to take him and he hastened forward, forcing his legs to obey.
 “Lad!” Muradin’s voice brought him up sharply. “So precious a treasure won’t be just left sitting
around for anyone tae find. We must proceed wi’ a bit o’ caution.”
 Arthas chafed, but Muradin had more experience in these matters. So he nodded, gripped his
hammer firmly, and entered warily. The immediate relief from the wind and driving snow heartened
him, and they moved deeper into the heart of the cavern. The illumination he had glimpsed from
outside proved to be coming from softly glowing turquoise crystals and veins of ore, embedded in the
rock walls, floors, and ceilings themselves. He had heard of such luminescent crystals and was now
grateful for the light they provided. His men would be able to concentrate on holding their weapons,
not torches. Once, his hammer would have glowed with enough radiance to guide them. He frowned
at the thought, then pushed it down. It did not matter where light to see by came from, only that it was
present.
 It was then that they heard the voices. Muradin had been right—they were expected.
 The voices were deep, hollow, and cold- sounding, and their words were dire as they floated to
Arthas’s ears. “Turn back, mortals. Death and darkness are all that await you in this forsaken vault. You
shall not pass.”
 Muradin halted. “Lad,” he said, his voice soft, though in this place it seemed to echo endlessly,
“perhaps we should listen.”
 “Listen to what?” Arthas cried. “A pathetic last effort to turn me from my path to save my people? It’s
going to take more than ominous words to do that.”
 Gripping his hammer he hastened forward, rounded a corner—and stopped in his tracks, trying to
take in everything at once.
 They had found the owners of the icy voices. For a moment, Arthas was reminded of Jaina’s
obedient water elemental, who had helped her fight off the ogres on that long- ago day before
everything had taken such grim and horrific turns. The beings hovered over the cold stone floor of the
cavern, made of ice and unnatural essence instead of water, wearing armor that looked as if it had
grown of and from them. They had helms, but no faces; gauntlets, weapons and shields, but no arms.
 Alarming though they were, Arthas gave these fearsome elemental spirits no more than a passing
glance as his eye was drawn to the reason they had come here.
 Frostmourne.
 It was caught in a hovering, jagged chunk of ice, the runes that ran the length of its blade glowing a
cool blue. Below it was a dais of some sort, standing on a large gently raised mound that was covered
in a dusting of snow. A soft light, coming from somewhere high above where the cavern was open to
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 122
daylight, shone down on the runeblade. The icy prison hid some details of the sword’s shape and form,
exaggerated others. It was revealed and concealed at the same time, and all the more tempting, like a
new lover imperfectly glimpsed through a gauzy curtain. Arthas knew the blade—it was the selfsame
sword he had seen in his dream when he first arrived. The sword that had not killed Invincible, but
that had brought him back healed and healthy. He’d thought it a good omen then, but now he knew it
was a true sign. This was what he had come to find. This sword would change everything. Arthas
stared raptly at it, his hands almost physically aching to grasp it, his fingers to wrap themselves around
the hilt, his arms to feel the weapon swinging smoothly in the blow that would end Mal’Ganis, end the
torment he had visited upon the people of Lordaeron, end this lust for revenge. Drawn, he stepped
forward.
 The uncanny elemental spirit drew its icy sword.
 “Turn away, before it is too late,” it intoned.
 “Still trying to protect the sword, are you?” Arthas snarled, angry and embarrassed at his reaction.
 “No.” The being’s voice rumbled the word. “Trying to protect you from it.”
 For a second, Arthas stared in surprise. Then he shook his head, eyes narrowing in determination.
This was nothing more than a trick. He could never turn away from Frostmourne—turn away from
saving his people. He would not fall for the lie. He charged and his men followed. The entities
converged on them, attacking with their unnatural weapons, but Arthas focused his attention on the
leader, the one assigned to guard Frostmourne. All his pent- up hope, worry, fear, and frustration, he
unleashed on the strange protector. His men did likewise, turning to attack the other elemental
guardians of the sword. His hammer rose and fell, rose and fell, shattering the icy armor as cries of
anger were ripped from his throat. How dare this thing stand between him and Frostmourne? How
dare it—
 With a final agonized sound, like that of the rattle coming from a dying man’s throat, the spirit flung
up what passed for hands and disappeared.
 Arthas stood staring, panting, the breath coming from his chilled lips in white puffs. Then he
turned to the hard- won prize. All misgivings disappeared as he again laid eyes on the sword.
 “Behold, Muradin,” he breathed, aware that his voice was shaking, “our salvation, Frostmourne.”
 “Hold, lad.” Muradin’s blunt words, almost an order, were like cold water doused on Arthas. He
blinked, startled out of his trancelike rapture, and turned to look at the dwarf.
 “What? Why?” he demanded.
 Muradin was staring, eyes narrowed, at the hovering sword and the dais below it. “Something’s not
right here.” He pointed a stubby finger at the runeblade. “This has been too easy. And look at it, sitting
here wi’ light coming from who knows where, like a flower waiting tae be plucked.”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 123
 “Too easy?” Arthas shot him a disbelieving glance. “It’s taken you long enough to find it. And we had
to fight these things to get to it.”
 “Bah,” snorted Muradin. “Everything I ken about artifacts is telling me that there’s something as
fishy here as the Booty Bay docks.” He sighed, his brow still furrowed. “Wait…there’s an inscription on
the dais. Let me see if I can read this. It might tell us something.”
 Both of them advanced, Muradin to kneel and peer at the writing, Arthas to draw closer to the
beckoning sword. Arthas gave the inscription that so intrigued Muradin a cursory glance. It was not
written in any language he knew, but the dwarf seemed to be able to read it, judging by how his eyes
flickered across the letters.
 Arthas lifted a hand and stroked the ice that separated them—smooth, slick, deathly cold—ice, yes,
but there was something unusual about it. It wasn’t simply frozen water. He didn’t know how he could
tell, but he could. There was something very powerful, almost unearthly about it.
 Frostmourne…
 “Aye, I thought I recognized this. It’s written in Kalimag—the elemental language,” Muradin
continued. He frowned as he read. “It’s…a warning.”
 “Warning? Warning of what?” Perhaps shattering the ice would damage the sword somehow,
Arthas thought. The unnatural ice block itself, though, seemed to have been—almost cut from another,
larger piece of ice. Muradin translated slowly. Arthas listened with half an ear, his eyes on the sword.
 “Whosoever takes up this blade shall wield power eternal. Just as th’ blade rends flesh, so must
power scar th’ spirit.” The dwarf leaped to his feet, looking more agitated than Arthas had ever seen
him. “Och, I should’ve known. Th’ blade is cursed! Let’s get the hell out of here!”
 Arthas’s heart gave a strange wrench at Muradin’s exclamation. Leave? Leave this sword behind,
hovering in its frozen prison, untouched, unused, with such vast power to offer him? “Power eternal,”
the inscription had promised, along with the threat of scarring the spirit.
 “My spirit is already scarred,” Arthas said. And so it was. It had been scarred by the needless death
of a beloved steed, by the horror of watching the dead rise, by the betrayal of one he loved—yes, he had
loved Jaina Proudmoore, he could say it now in this moment where his soul seemed to lie naked in
front of the sword’s judgment. It had been scarred by being forced to slaughter hundreds, by the need
to lie to his men and forever silence those who would question and disobey him. It had been scarred by
so very much. Surely the marks left by the power to right a horrible wrong could not be greater than
these.
 “Arthas, lad,” Muradin said, his rough voice pleading. “Ye’ve enough tae deal wi’ without bringing a
curse on yer head.”
 “A curse?” Arthas laughed bitterly. “I would gladly bear any curse to save my homeland.”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 124
 Out of the corner of his eye, he saw Muradin shiver. “Arthas, ye ken I’m a solid one, no given tae
flights o’ fancy. But I tell ye, this is bad business, lad. Leave it be. Let it stay here, lost and forgotten.
Mal’Ganis is here, well, that’s fine. Let him freeze his demonic arse here in the wilderness. Forget this
business and let’s lead your men home.”
 An image of the men suddenly filled Arthas’s mind. He saw them, and beside them he saw the
hundreds that had already fallen to this horrible plague. Fallen only to rise, unthinking rotting hunks of
flesh. What of them? What of their souls, their suffering, their sacrifice? Another image appeared—a
huge piece of ice, the same ice that now encased Frostmourne. He saw now where this chunk of ice
had come from. It was part of something larger, stronger—and it, with the runeblade inside it, had
been somehow sent to him to avenge those who had fallen. A voice whispered in his mind: The dead
demand vengeance.
 What was a handful of living men compared to the torment of those who had fallen in so horrible a
fashion?
 “Damn the men!”
 The words seemed to explode from someplace deep in his gut. “I have a duty to the dead. Nothing
shall prevent me from having my revenge, old friend.” Now he tore his gaze away from the sword long
enough to meet Muradin’s worried gaze, and his face softened slightly. “Not even you.”
 “Arthas—I taught ye tae fight. I wanted tae help ye be a good warrior as well as a good king. But
part o’ being a good warrior is picking which battles tae fight—and which weapons tae fight wi’.” He
stabbed a stubby forefinger at Frostmourne. “And that’s a weapon ye’ll nae want to be putting in your
arsenal.”
 Arthas put both hands up against the ice that was the sword’s sheath and brought his face to within
an inch of the smooth surface. As if from somewhere far away, he heard Muradin still speaking.
 “Listen tae me, lad. We’ll find another way tae save yer people. Let’s leave now, go back and find
that way.”
 Muradin was wrong. He simply didn’t understand. Arthas had to do this. If he walked away now,
he would have failed, again, and he couldn’t let that happen. He had been thwarted at every turn.
 Not this time.
 He believed in the Light, because he could see it and had used it, and he believed in ghosts and the
walking dead, because he had fought them. But until this moment, he had scoffed at the idea of unseen
powers, of spirits of places or things. But now, his heart racing in anticipation and with a yearning, a
craving that seemed to gnaw at his very soul, the words came from his lips as if of their own accord,
laced with his dreadful wanting.
 “Now, I call out to the spirits of this place,” he said, his breath frosting in the cold, still air. Just
beyond his reach, Frostmourne hung, suspended, awaiting him. “Whatever you be, good or ill or
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 125
neither or both. I can feel you here. I know you are listening. I’m ready. I understand. And I tell you
now—I will give anything, or pay any price, if only you will help me save my people.”
 For a long, terrible moment, nothing happened. His breath frosted, faded, frosted again, and cold
sweat dotted his brow. He had offered everything he had—had he been refused? Had he failed yet
again?
 And then with a low groan that made his breath catch, a sudden crack ran up the smooth surface of
the ice. It raced its way upward, zigzagging and spreading, until Arthas could barely glimpse the
sword it held within its heart. Then he was stumbling backward, clutching his ears at the sudden loud
cracking noise that filled the chamber.
 The icy casket encasing the sword exploded. Shards flew across the chamber, swords themselves,
sharp and jagged. They shattered against the unyielding stone floor and walls, but even as Arthas
dropped to his knees, his arms flying up automatically to cover his head, he heard a cry suddenly cut off.
 “Muradin!”
 The impact of the ice shard had knocked the dwarf back several feet. Now he lay sprawled on the
cold stone floor, a spear of ice impaling his midsection, the blood sluggishly flowing around it. His eyes
were closed and he was limp. Arthas scrambled to his feet and hastened over to his old friend and
trainer, tugging off his gauntlet. He slipped an arm around the limp form, placing his hand on the
wound, staring at it, willing the Light to come and limn his hands with healing energy. Guilt racked
him.
 So this was the dreadful price. Not his own life, but that of a friend. Someone who had cared for
him, taught him, supported him. He bowed his head, tears stinging his eyes, and prayed.
 It’s my folly. My price. Please—
 And then, like a familiar caress from a loved friend, he felt it. The Light raced through him,
comforting and warm, and he bit back a sob as he saw the glow again begin to embrace his hand. He
had fallen so far, but it wasn’t too late. The Light had not abandoned him. All he needed to do was
drink it in, open his heart to it. Muradin would not die. He could heal him, and together they—
 Something stirred at the back of his neck. No, no, not the back of his neck…the back of his mind.
He looked up quickly—
 And stared in wonder.
 It had flung itself free to imbed itself in front of him, its blue- white runes enveloping it in a cold and
glorious light. His own Light faded from his hands as he rose to his feet, almost hypnotized.
Frostmourne was waiting for him, a lover needing the touch of the desired one to waken to full glory.
 The whispering in the back of his mind continued. This was the path. It was foolish to trust in the
Light. It had failed him, repeatedly. It had not been there to save Invincible, had not been enough to
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 126
stop the inexorable march of this plague that was on its way to wiping out the population of his
kingdom. The power, the strength of Frostmourne—that was the only thing that could stand against
the might of a dreadlord.
 Muradin was a casualty of this awful war. But hopefully, his sacrifice would be the last. Arthas got
to his feet and took unsteady steps toward the radiant weapon, his hand, still wet with the blood of his
friend, outstretched and trembling. It closed on the shaft and his fingers curled around it, fitting it
perfectly, as if the one was made for the other.
 Cold shot through him, shivering up his arms, spreading over his body and into his heart. It was
painful for a moment and he knew a hint of alarm, and then suddenly it was all right. It was all all right;
Frostmourne was his and he was its, and its voice was speaking, whispering, caressing inside his mind
as if it had always been there.
 With a cry of joy, he lifted the weapon, gazing at it in wonder and fierce pride. He would make
things right—he, Arthas Menethil, and the glorious Frostmourne that was now as much a part of him
as his mind or his heart or his breath, and he listened intently to the secrets it revealed.
 World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 CHAPTER SIXTEEN
 Arthas and his men ran toward the encampment to discover that the battle had not abated in his
absence. The numbers of his men had dwindled, but there were no corpses. He did not expect to see
any—those who fell rose as adversaries, under the command of the dreadlord.
 Falric, his armor spattered with gore, cried out to him. “Prince Arthas! We’ve done what we could
and—Where is Muradin? We can’t hold out any longer!”
 “Muradin is dead,” Arthas said. The cold but comforting essence of the sword seemed to abate a
little, and pain swelled in his heart. Muradin had paid the price—but it was worth it, if it would fell
Mal’Ganis. The dwarf would have agreed, had he known everything, understood as Arthas
understood. Muradin’s men looked stricken even as they continued to fire round after round into the
waves of undead that continued to pound against them. “His death was not in vain. Take heart,
Captain. The enemy will not stand long against the might of Frostmourne!”
 As they watched, disbelief washing over their faces, Arthas charged into the fray.
 He had thought he fought well with his blessed hammer, now lying discarded and forgotten in the
icy vault where Frostmourne had once been imprisoned, but it was nothing to the damage he dealt
now. Frostmourne felt more like an extension of himself rather than a weapon. He quickly found a
rhythm and began to slice the undead down as if they were so many stalks of grain falling before the
harvesting scythe. How balanced and perfect a weapon it was in his hands. One arcing blow severed
the head from the shoulders of a ghoul. He swept Frostmourne around, scattering the bones of a
skelton. Another rhythmic stroke downed a third foe. They fell all around him, the rotting bodies
beginning to pile up, as he cut a path through them. At one point, looking for his next enemy, he
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 127
caught sight of Falric staring at him. There was awe on the familiar face, but also shock and—horror?
Only at the carnage he was wreaking, surely. Frostmourne was all but singing in his hands.
 The wind picked up and the snow began to fall, thick and fast. Frostmourne seemed to approve, for
the increased snowfall did not seem to hamper Arthas in the slightest. Again and again the blade found
its mark, and more and more undead things fell. At last, the minions had been dealt with. It was time
for their master.
 “Mal’Ganis, you coward!” Arthas cried, even his voice sounding different in his own ears now, as it
carried easily over the howling wind. “Come show yourself! You taunted me into coming here, now
stand and face me!”
 And then the demon lord was there, bigger than Arthas remembered, smirking down at the prince.
He straightened to his full imposing height, his wing beating the air, his tail lashing. The undead
warriors at his command stilled as he casually flicked a finger.
 Arthas was prepared for the dreadlord’s frightening appearance this time. It did not rattle him.
Staring at his enemy, he wordlessly lifted Frostmourne, and the runes etched along its length gleamed.
Mal’Ganis recognized the weapon and a hint of a frown curved his blue lips.
 “So, you’ve taken up Frostmourne at the expense of your comrades’ lives, just as the Dark Lord said
you would. You’re stronger than I thought.”
 The words were heard, but there were other words, whispering silkily in his brain. Arthas listened,
and then grinned fiercely.
 “You waste your breath, Mal’Ganis. I heed only the voice of Frostmourne now.”
 The dreadlord threw back his horned head and laughed. “You hear the voice of the Dark Lord,”
Mal’Ganis retorted. He pointed a sharp, black- nailed finger at the mighty runeblade. “He whispers to
you through the blade you wield!”
 Arthas felt the blood drain from his face. The dreadlord’s master…spoke to him through
Frostmourne? But…how could that be? Was this the final trick? Had he been gulled and delivered
directly into Mal’Ganis’s taloned hands?
 “What does he say, young human?” The smirk came again, the expression of one who knows
something another does not. The dreadlord was gloating, reveling in this twist. “What does the Dark
Lord of the Dead tell you now?”
 The whispers came again, but this time it was Arthas who smirked, a mirror image of the same
expression the dreadlord bore. Now it was he who knew something Mal’Ganis did not.
 Arthas whirled Frostmourne over his head, the enormous blade light and graceful in his hands, and
then he eased into an attack position. “He tells me that the time for my vengeance has come.”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 128
 The green, glowing eyes widened. “What? He can’t possibly mean to—”
 Arthas charged.
 The mighty runeblade lifted, descended. The dreadlord was taken by surprise, but only for an
instant, and managed to get his staff up in time to deflect the blow. He leaped aside, great bat wings
creating a quick gust of wind that blew Arthas’s golden hair about wildly but did not affect his balance
or speed. He came in again and again, coldly in control but swift and deadly as a viper, the blade
glowing with eagerness. A brief thought crossed his mind: Frostmourne hungers.
 And a part of him responded with a frisson of fear: Hungers for what?
 It did not matter. He, Arthas, hungered for revenge, and he was going to have it. Every time
Mal’Ganis tried to cast a spell, Frostmourne was there, knocking him aside, slicing his flesh, harrying
him until the moment came when the deathblow would be dealt. He felt Frostmourne’s anticipation,
its craving, and he cried out as he swung the runeblade in a shimmering blue arc to neatly carve a
deadly furrow across Mal’Ganis’s midsection.
 Dark blood spurted in an arc, pattering on the snow, as the dreadlord fell. There was astonishment
on his face; even at the end, he had not believed he could be defeated.
 For a moment Arthas stood, the wind and snow writhing about him, the glow of the runes on
Frostmourne’s blade, partially obscured by dark demonic blood, illuminating the glorious scene.
 “It is finished,” he said softly.
 This part of your journey, yes, young prince, Frostmourne whispered—or was it truly the Dark
Lord Mal’Ganis had spoken of? He did not know or care. Carefully he bent and wiped the blade clean
in the snow. But there is more. So much more. So much power that could be yours. So much
knowledge and control.
 Arthas remembered Muradin’s reading of the inscription. His hand went to his heart without his
immediately realizing it. The blade was part of him now, and he was part of it.
 The snowstorm was becoming worse. He realized with dawning surprise that he was not at all
cold. He straightened, holding Frostmourne, and looked about him. The demon lay stiffening at his
feet. The voice—Frostmourne’s, or the mysterious Dark Lord’s—was right.
 There was more. So much more.
 And the winter would teach it.
 Arthas Menethil clutched the runeblade, gazed out into the snowstorm, and ran to embrace it all.

World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 129
 Arthas knew he would remember the bells all his life. They were rung only on occasions of great
state import—a royal wedding, the birth of an heir, the funeral of a king, all the things that marked
passages in the life of a kingdom. But today, they were being rung in celebration. He, Arthas Menethil,
had returned home.
 He had sent word ahead of his triumph. Of discovering who had been behind the plague. Of
searching him out. Of slaying him, and of this day, his glorious return to his place of birth. As he strode
along the road toward Capital City, on foot, he was greeted with cheers and applause, the grateful
outpouring of thanks of a nation saved from disaster by their beloved prince. He accepted this as his
due, but his mind was on seeing his father after so long.
 “I would speak with you in private, Father, and tell you of the things I have learned and seen,” he
had written into his letter, delivered a few days earlier by a swift courier. “You have, I am certain,
spoken with Jaina and Uther. I can imagine what they have said—tried to turn you against me. I assure
you I have only done what I believe to be the greatest good for the citizens of Lordaeron. In the end, I
have destroyed the one who began this plague upon our people, and I return home victorious, eager to
begin a new era for our kingdom.”
 Those who marched behind him were as silent as he, their faces as cowled. The crowd did not seem
to require their response to wildly celebrate their return. The mighty drawbridge was lowered and
Arthas strode across it. The cheering throngs were here, too, no longer comprised of commoners, but
of diplomats, lesser nobility, visiting dignitaries from the elves, dwarves, and gnomes. They stood not
just in the courtyard but also above it in viewing boxes. Rose petals, pink and white and red, rained
down upon the land’s returning hero.
 Arthas remembered that once, he had thought to see Jaina standing before him on their wedding
day, the petals falling upon a face lit with a smile, turned up to kiss him.
 Jaina…
 Moved by the image, he caught one of the red petals in a gloved hand. He thumbed it thoughtfully,
and then frowned as a stain appeared. It grew before his eyes, desiccating and destroying the petal,
until it was more brown than red in his palm. With a quick, dismissive gesture, he tossed the dead
thing away and continued.
 He pushed open the huge doors to the throne room he knew so well, strode forward, glanced at
Terenas briefly, and threw his father a smile that was mostly hidden by the cowl. Arthas knelt in
obeisance, Frostmourne held before him, its tip touching the seal carved into the stone floor.
 “Ah, my son. Glad I am to see you safely home,” Terenas said, rising somewhat unsteadily.
 Terenas looked unwell, Arthas thought. The incidents of the last several months had aged the
monarch. His hair was grayer now, his eyes tired.
 But it was all going to be all right now.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 130
 You no longer need to sacrifice for your people. You no longer need to bear the weight of your
crown. I’ve taken care of everything.
 Arthas rose, his armor clattering with the movement. He lifted a hand and drew back the hood
from his face, watching for his father’s reaction. Terenas’s eyes widened as he took in the change that
had come over his only son.
 Arthas’s hair, once golden as the wheat that had given sustenance to his people, was now bonewhite. He knew his face was pale as well, as if the blood had been drained from it.
 It is time, Frostmourne whispered in his mind. Arthas moved toward his father, who had halted on
the dais, staring, uncertain. There were several guards positioned about the room, but they would be
no match against him, Frostmourne, and the two who had accompanied him. Arthas strode boldly up
the carpeted steps and seized his father by the arm.
 Arthas drew back his blade. Frostmourne’s runes brightened in anticipation. And then a whisper,
not from the runeblade, but a memory—
 —the voice of a dark- haired prince, seemingly from another lifetime ago—
 “He was assassinated. A trusted friend…she killed him. Stabbed him right in the heart…”
 Arthas shook his head and the voice was silenced.
 “What is this? What are you doing, my son?”
 “Succeeding you…Father.”
 And Frostmourne’s hunger was sated—for the moment.

 Arthas turned them loose then—his new, unquestioning, obedient subjects. Dispatching the guards
who charged him upon the death of his father was a simple matter, and he stormed with cold purpose
back out into the courtyard.
 It was madness.
 What had once been revelry had now become frenzy. What had once been celebration had now
become a frantic flight for life. Few escaped. Most of those who had waited for hours in line to
welcome their prince back now lay dead, blood congealing from hideous wounds, limbs ripped off,
bodies broken. Ambassadors now lay with commoners, men and women with children, all hideously
equal in death.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 131
 Arthas did not care what their eventual fate was—carrion for the crows, or new subjects to follow
his rule. He would leave that to his captains, Falric and Marwyn, as bone- white as he and twice as
merciless. Arthas marched through the way he had come, focused and intent upon one single thing.
 Once clear of the courtyard and the corpses, animated or still, he broke into a run. No horse would
bear him now; the beasts grew frantic at the smell of him and those who followed him. But he had
found that he did not tire; not when Frostmourne, or the Lich King who spoke to him through the
runeblade, was whispering to him. And so he ran swiftly, his legs carrying him to a place he had not
been in years.
 Voices swirled in his head, memories, snippets of conversations:
 “You know you were not supposed to ride him yet.”
 “You missed your lessons. Again…”
 Invincible’s horrible screams of agony, echoing in his mind. The Light, pausing for that awful
moment, as if deciding whether or not he was worthy of its grace. Jaina’s face as he ended their
relationship.
 “Listen to me, boy…. The shadow has already fallen, and nothing you do will deter it…. The harder
you strive to slay your enemies, the faster you’ll deliver your people into their hands….”
 “…This isn’t a blighted apple crop; this is a city full of human beings!…”
 “…We know so little—we can’t just slaughter them like animals out of our own fear!”
 “Ye lied tae yer men and betrayed the mercenaries who fought for ye!…That’s nae King Terenas’s
boy.”
 But they were the ones who could not see, could not grasp. Jaina—Uther—Terenas—Muradin. All
of them, at some point, by word or look, had told him he had been wrong.
 He slowed his pace as he came to the farmstead. His subjects had been here before him, and now
there were only corpses lying, stiffening in the earth. Arthas steeled himself against the pain that
recognition brought with it even now; they had been the lucky ones, to simply die. A man, a woman, a
youth his own age.
 And the snapdragons…blooming like mad this year, it would seem. Arthas stepped close and
extended a hand to touch one of the beautiful, tall, lavender- blue flowers, then hesitated, remembering
the rose petal.
 He had not come here for flowers.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 132
 He turned and strode to a grave, nearly seven years old now. Grass had overtaken it, but the marker
was still readable. He did not need to read it to know what lay here.
 For a moment he stood, more moved by the death of the one in this grave than by that of his own
father, by his own hand.
 The power is yours, came the whispers. Do as you will.
 Arthas extended one hand, Frostmourne firmly gripped in the other. Dark light began to swirl
around the outstretched hand, increasing in speed. It moved from his fingers like a serpent, undulating
and writhing of its own accord, and then it speared down into the earth.
 Arthas felt it connect with the skeleton below. Joy flooded him, and tears stung his eyes. He lifted
his hand, pulling the no- longer- dead thing from its seven- year slumber in the cool dark earth.
 “Arise!” he commanded, the word bursting from his throat.
 The grave erupted, showering bits of earth. Bony legs pawed, hooves seeking purchase on the
shifting soil, and a skull thrust upward, breaking the surface. Arthas watched breathlessly, a smile on
his too- pale face.
 I saw you being born, he thought, remembering a membrane enshrouding a wriggling, wet, new
little life. I helped you come into this world, and I helped you leave it…and now by my hand, you are
reborn.
 The skeletal steed struggled through the earth and finally emerged, planting its forelegs firmly and
hoisting itself up. Red fire burned in its empty eye sockets. It tossed its head, pranced and somehow
whinnied, though its soft tissue had long since rotted away.
 Trembling, Arthas extended a hand to the undead creature, who whickered and nuzzled his hand
with its bony muzzle. Seven years ago, he had ridden this horse to its death. Seven years ago, he had
wept tears that had frozen on his face as he lifted his sword and stabbed the beloved beast straight
through its gallant heart.
 He had carried the guilt of that act alone all this time. But now he realized—it was all part of his
destiny. If he had not slain his steed, he could not now bring it back. Alive, the horse would have feared
him. Undead as it was, with fire for eyes, its bones held together by the necromantic magic that Arthas
now could wield thanks to the gift of the mysterious Lich King, horse and rider could at last be
reunited, as they had always been meant to be. It hadn’t been a mistake, seven years ago; he hadn’t been
wrong. Not then, not now.
 Not ever.
 And this was proof.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 133
 Throughout the land that he now ruled, his father’s blood still slick and crimson on Frostmourne,
death was coming. The change.
 “This kingdom shall fall,” he promised his beloved steed as he threw his cloak over its bony back and
mounted. “And from the ashes shall arise a new order that will shake the very foundation of the world!”
 The horse whickered.
 Invincible.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 134
 World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King


 PART THREE
 THE DARK LADY
 World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 INTERLUDE
 Sylvanas Windrunner, former ranger- general of Quel’Thalas, banshee, and Dark Lady of the
Forsaken, strode from the royal quarters with the same quick, lithe stride she had had in life. She
preferred her corporeal form for ordinary, everyday activities. Her leather boots made no sound on the
stone floor of the Undercity, but all heads turned to watch their lady. She was unique and
unmistakable.
 Once, her hair had been golden, her eyes blue, her skin the color of a fresh peach. Once, she had
been alive. Now her hair, often covered by a blue- black cowl, was black as midnight with white streaks
and her formerly peach- hued skin a faint, pearly blue- gray. She’d chosen to don the armor she had
worn in life, well- tooled leather that revealed most of her slender but muscular torso. Her ears
twitched at the murmurings; she did not often venture forth from her chambers. She was ruler of this
city, and the world came to her.
 Beside her hurried Master Apothecary Faranell, head of the Royal Apothecary Society, who was
talking animatedly and simpering. “I am most grateful you agreed to come, my lady,” he said, trying to
bow and walk and speak at the same time. “You did say you wished to be informed when the
experiments were successful, and you wanted to see them yourself once we—”
 “I am well aware of my own orders, Doctor,” Sylvanas snapped as they began to descend a winding
corridor into the bowels of the Undercity.
 “Of course, of course. Here we are.” They emerged into a room that to one with weaker sensibilities
would seem like a house of horrors. On a large table, a stooped undead was busily sewing together
pieces of different corpses, humming a little under his breath. Sylvanas smiled slightly.
 “It is good to see someone who enjoys his work so,” she replied a trifle archly. The apprentice
started slightly, and then bowed deeply.
 There was a low buzz of some kind of energy crackling. Other alchemists bustled about, mixing
potions, weighing ingredients, jotting notes. The smell was a combination of putrefaction, chemicals,
and, incongruously, the clean sweet smell of certain herbs. Sylvanas was startled by her reaction. The
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 135
scent of the herbs made her oddly…homesick. Fortunately, the softer emotion did not last long. Such
emotions never did.
 “Show me,” she demanded. Faranell bowed and ushered her through the main area, past pieces of
bodies hanging on hooks, into a side room.
 The faint sound of sobbing reached her ears. As she entered, Sylvanas saw several cages on the floor
or swinging slowly from chains, all of them filled with test subjects. Some were human. Some were
Forsaken. All were dull- eyed with fear that had pierced so deep and had gone on so long that they
were almost numb.
 They would not be so for much longer.
 “As you can imagine, my lady,” Faranell was saying, “it is difficult to transport Scourge as test
subjects. Of course for experimental purposes, Forsaken are identical to Scourge. But I am delighted
to report that our tests in the field have been well documented and quite successful.”
 Excitement began to stir in Sylvanas, and she graced the apothecary with a rare and still beautiful
smile. “That pleases me greatly,” she said. The undead doctor fairly quivered in delight. He beckoned
to his assistant Keever, a Forsaken whose brain had obviously been damaged by his first death and
who muttered to himself in the third person as he removed two test subjects. One was a human
woman, who was apparently not so lost in fear and despair as not to start weeping silently when
Keever dragged her from her cage. The Forsaken male, however, was utterly impassive and stood
quietly. Sylvanas eyed him.
 “Criminal?”
 “Of course, my lady.” She wondered if it were true. But in the end, it didn’t matter. He would serve
the Forsaken, even so. The human girl was on her knees. Keever stooped down, yanked her head up by
her hair, and when she opened her mouth to cry out in pain, he poured a cup of something down her
throat and covered her mouth, forcing her to swallow.
 Sylvanas watched while she struggled. Beside her, the Forsaken male accepted the cup that
Faranell offered without protest, draining it dry.
 It happened quickly. The human girl soon stopped struggling, her body tensing, and then going
into paroxysms. Keever let her go, watching almost curiously as blood began to stream from her
mouth, nose, eyes, and ears. Sylvanas turned her gaze to the Forsaken. He still regarded her steadily,
silently. She began to frown.
 “Perhaps this is not as effective as your—”
 The Forsaken shuddered. He struggled to stand erect for a moment longer, but his rapidly
weakening body betrayed him and he stumbled, falling hard. Everyone stepped back. Sylvanas
watched raptly, her lips parted in excitement.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 136
 “The same strain?” she asked Faranell. The human female whimpered once and then was still, her
eyes open. The alchemist nodded happily.
 “Indeed it is,” he said. “As you can imagine, we are quite—”
 The undead spasmed, his skin breaking open in spots and weeping black ichor, and then he, too,
was still.
 “—pleased with the results.”
 “Indeed,” Sylvanas said. She was hard put to conceal her own elation; “pleased” was a pale word
indeed. “A plague that kills both humans and Scourge. And, obviously, affects my own people as well,
as they, too, are undead.”
 She gave him a look from glowing silver eyes. “We must take care that this never falls into the wrong
hands. The results could be…devastating.”
 He gulped. “Indeed, my lady, indeed they could.”
 She forced a neutral expression as she returned to the royal quarters. Her mind was racing with a
thousand things, but foremost among them, burning as brightly and wildly as the wicker man she lit
every Hallow’s End, was a single thought:
 At last, Arthas, you will pay for what you have done. The humans who spawned such as you shall be
slaughtered. Your Scourge shall be stopped in their tracks. You will no longer be able to hide behind
your armies of mindless undead puppets. And we will grace you with the same mercy and compassion
you showed us.
 Despite her great control, she found herself smiling.
 World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
 It was, Arthas mused as he rode upon the back of the skeletal, faithful Invincible toward Andorhal,
a truly great irony that he who had slain the necromancer Kel’Thuzad was now charged with
resurrecting him.
 Frostmourne whispered to him, although he did not need the voice of the sword—the voice of the
Lich King, as he desired to be known—to reassure him. There was no going back. Nor did he wish to.
 After the fall of Capital City, Arthas had retreated into a dark version of a paladin’s pilgrimage. He
had ridden the length and breadth of his land, bringing his new subjects to town after town and
unleashing them upon the populace. He thought the Scourge, which Kel’Thuzad had called them, a
fitting name. The instrument of self- flagellation of the same name, sometimes used by some of the
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 137
more fringe elements of the priesthood, was meant to cleanse impurities. His Scourge would cleanse
the land of the living. He stood straddling the worlds; he was alive after a fashion, but the Lich King’s
soft whispers were calling him death knight, and the leeching of color from his hair and skin and eyes
seemed to indicate that it was more than a title. He did not know; he did not care. He was the Lich
King’s favored, and the Scourge was his to command, and in a strange, twisted way, he found that he
cared for them.
 Arthas now served the Lich King through one of his sergeants, a dreadlord, almost identical in form
to Mal’Ganis. This, too, was irony; this, too, did not distress him.
 “Like Mal’Ganis, I am a dreadlord. But I am not your enemy,” Tichondrius had reassured him. The
lips twisted in a smile that was more of a sneer. “In truth, I’ve come to congratulate you. By killing your
own father and delivering this land to the Scourge, you have passed your first test. The Lich King is
pleased with your…enthusiasm.”
 Arthas felt buffeted by twin emotions—pain and exultation.
 “Yes,” he said, keeping his voice steady in front of the demon, “I’ve damned everyone and everything
I’ve ever loved in his name, and I still feel no remorse. No pity. No shame.”
 And in his heart of hearts, there came another whisper, but not from Frostmourne: Liar.
 He forced the sentiment down. That voice would be silenced, somehow. He could not afford to
permit the softness to grow. It was like gangrene; it would eat him, if he let it.
 Tichondrius seemed not to notice. He pointed to Frostmourne. “The runeblade you carry was
forged by my kind, long ago. The Lich King has empowered it to steal souls. Yours was the first one it
claimed.”
 Emotions warred within Arthas. He stared at the blade. Tichondrius’s word choice had not
escaped him. Stolen. Had the Lich King asked for his soul in exchange for saving his people, Arthas
would have given it. But the Lich King had asked no such thing; he had simply taken it. And now it
was there, locked inside the glowing weapon, so close to Arthas that the prince—the king—could
almost, but not quite, touch it. And had Arthas even gotten what he had set out to get? Had his people
been saved?
 Did it matter?
 Tichondrius watched him closely. “Then I’ll make do without one,” Arthas said lightly. “What is the
Lich King’s will?”
 It had been, it turned out, to rally what was left of the Cult of the Damned in order to have aid for a
greater undertaking—the recovery of Kel’Thuzad’s remains.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 138
 They lay, he had been told, in Andorhal, where Arthas himself had left them, a puddle of reeking,
decaying flesh. Andorhal, where the shipments of plagued grain had come from. He recalled his fury as
he had attacked the necromancer, but felt it no longer. A smile curved his pale lips. Irony.
 The buildings that had once been a conflagration were now charred timbers. No one save the
undead should be here now…and yet…Arthas frowned, drawing rein. Invincible halted, as obedient in
death as he had been in life. Arthas could glimpse figures moving about. What little light there was on
this dim day glinted off—
 “Armor,” he said. There were armored men stationed about the perimeter of the cemetery and one
near a small tomb. He squinted, and then his eyes widened. Not just living beings, not just warriors,
but paladins. And he knew why they were here. Kel’Thuzad, it seemed, drew the interest of many.
 But he had dissolved the order. There shouldn’t be any paladins, let alone gathered here.
Frostmourne whispered; it was hungry. Arthas drew the mighty runeblade, lifted it so the little army of
acolytes who accompanied him could see and be inspired by it, and charged. Invincible sprang
forward, and Arthas saw the shock on the faces of the cemetery’s guardians as he bore down on them.
They fought valiantly, but in the end, it was futile; and they knew it, he could see it in their eyes.
 He had just tugged Frostmourne free, feeling the sword’s joy in taking another soul, when a voice
cried, “Arthas!”
 It was a voice Arthas had heard before, but he couldn’t quite place it. He turned toward the
speaker.
 The man was tall and imposing. He had removed his helm, and it was the thick beard that jogged
Arthas’s memory. “Gavinrad,” he said, surprised. “It has been a long time.”
 “Not long enough. Where is the hammer we gifted you with?” Gavinrad said, almost spitting the
words. “The weapon of a paladin. A weapon of honor.”
 Arthas remembered. It had been this man who had placed the hammer at his feet. How clean, how
pure, how simple it had all seemed then.
 “I have a better weapon now,” Arthas said. He lifted Frostmourne. It seemed to pulse eagerly in his
hand. A whim struck him, and he obeyed it. “Stand aside, brother,” he said, an odd gentleness tingeing
his voice. “I’ve come to collect some old bones. For the sake of that day, and for the order to which we
both belonged, you will not come to harm if you let me pass.”
 Gavinrad’s bushy brows drew together and he spat in Arthas’s direction. “I can’t believe that we ever
called you brother! Why Uther ever vouched for you is beyond me. Your betrayal has broken Uther’s
heart, boy. He would have given his life for yours in a second, and this is how you repay his loyalty? I
knew it was a mistake to accept a spoiled prince into our order! You’ve made a mockery of the Silver
Hand!”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 139
 Fury rose in Arthas, so swift and so intense he almost choked on it. How dare he! Arthas was a
death knight, the hand of the Lich King. Life, death, and unlife—all fell within his purview. And
Gavinrad spat upon his offer of safety. Arthas gritted his teeth.
 “No, my brother,” he growled softly. “When I slay your body and raise it as my servant, and make
you dance to my tune, that, Gavinrad, will be a mockery of the Silver Hand.”
 Grinning, he beckoned tauntingly. The undead and the cultists who had accompanied him waited
silently. Gavinrad did not rush in, but gathered himself, praying to the Light that would not save him.
Arthas let him complete his prayer, let his weapon glow, as Arthas’s own hammer had once done. With
Frostmourne gripped tightly in his hand and the Lich King’s powers surging through his dead- notdead body, he knew that Gavinrad did not stand a chance.
 Nor did he. The paladin fought with everything he had, but it was not enough. Arthas toyed with
him a little, easing the sting that Gavinrad’s words had caused, but soon tired of the game and
dispatched his erstwhile brother in arms with a single mighty sword blow. He felt Frostmourne take in
and obliterate yet another soul, and shivered slightly as Gavinrad’s lifeless body fell to the earth.
Despite what he had promised his now- vanquished foe, Arthas let him stay dead.
 With a curt gesture he ordered his servants to begin retrieving the corpse. He had left Kel’Thuzad
to rot where he had fallen, but someone, doubtless the necromancer’s devout followers, had cared
enough to put the body in a small crypt. The acolytes of the Cult of the Damned now rushed forward,
finding the tomb and with effort pushing aside the lid. Inside was a coffin, which was quickly lifted out.
Arthas nudged it with his foot, grinning a little.
 “Come along now, necromancer,” he said teasingly as the casket was borne into the back of a vehicle
referred to as a “meat wagon.” “The powers that you once served have need of you again.”
 “Told you my death would mean little.”
 Arthas started. He had become somewhat accustomed to hearing voices; the Lich King, through
Frostmourne, whispered to him almost constantly now. But this was something different. He
recognized the voice; he had heard it before, but arrogant and taunting, not confidential and
conspiratorial.
 Kel’Thuzad.
 “What the…am I hearing ghosts now?”
 Not only hearing them. Seeing them. Or one specific ghost, at least. Kel’Thuzad’s shape slowly
formed before his eyes, translucent and hovering, the eyes dark holes. But it was unmistakably him, and
the spectral lips curved in a knowing smile.
 “I was right about you, Prince Arthas.”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 140
 “It took you long enough.” The bass, angry rumble of Tichondrius seemed to come out of nowhere,
and the specter—if it had indeed actually been there—disappeared. Arthas was shaken. Had he
imagined it? Was he starting to lose his sanity along with his soul?
 Tichondrius had not noticed anything and continued, removing the casket and peering disgustedly
inside at the nearly- liquefied corpse of Kel’Thuzad. Arthas found the stench more tolerable than he
had expected, though it was still horrific. It seemed like a lifetime ago he had struck at the necromancer
with his hammer and watched the too- rapid decomposition of the newly dead man. “These remains
are badly decomposed. They will never survive the trip to Quel’Thalas.”
 Arthas seized on the distraction. “Quel’Thalas?” The golden land of the elves…
 “Yes. Only the energies of the high elves’ Sunwell can bring Kel’Thuzad back to life.” The
dreadlord’s frown deepened. “And with each moment, he decays further. You must steal a very special
urn from the paladin’s keeping. They are bearing it here now. Place the necromancer’s remains within
it, and he will be well protected for the journey.”
 The dreadlord was smirking. There was more to this than at first was apparent. Arthas opened his
mouth to inquire, then closed it. Tichondrius would not tell him anyway. He shrugged, mounted
Invincible, and rode where he was told.
 Behind him, he heard the demon’s dark laughter.

 Tichondrius had been right. Moving slowly along the road, on foot, was a small funeral procession.
A military funeral, or one for an important dignitary; Arthas recognized the trappings of such things.
Several men in armor marched single file; one man in the center carried something in powerful arms.
The faint sun glinted on his armor and upon the item he bore—the urn of which Tichondrius had
spoken. And suddenly Arthas understood why Tichondrius had been amused.
 The paladin’s carriage was distinctive, his armor unique, and Arthas gripped Frostmourne with
hands that had suddenly become slightly unsteady. He forced the myriad, confusing, unsettling
sensations down, and ordered his men to approach.
 The funeral party was not large, though it was filled with fighters of distinction, and it was an easy
matter to completely surround them. They drew their weapons, but did not attack, turning instead for
instructions to the man who bore the urn. Uther—for it could be no one else, seemed completely in
control as he regarded his former student. His face was impassive, but more lined than Arthas
remembered. His eyes, however, burned with righteous fury.
 “The dog returns to his vomit,” Uther said, the words cracking like a whip. “I’d prayed you’d stay
away.”
 Arthas twitched slightly. His voice was rough as he replied, “I’m a bad copper—I just keep turning
up. I see you still call yourself a paladin, even though I dissolved your order.”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 141
 Uther actually laughed, though it was bitter laughter. “As if you could dissolve it yourself. I answer
to the Light, boy. So did you, once.”
 The Light. He still remembered it. His heart lurched in his chest and for a moment, just a moment,
he lowered the sword. Then the whispers came, reminding him of the power he now bore,
emphasizing that walking the path of the Light had not gotten him what he craved. Arthas gripped
Frostmourne firmly once more.
 “I did many things, once,” he retorted. “No longer.”
 “Your father ruled this land for fifty years, and you’ve ground it to dust in a matter of days. But
undoing and destruction is easy, isn’t it?”
 “Very dramatic, Uther. Pleasant as this is, I’ve no time to reminisce. I’ve come for the urn. Give it to
me, and I’ll make sure you die quickly.” No sparing this one. Not even if he begged. Especially not if he
begged. There was too much history between them. Too much—feeling.
 Now Uther showed emotion other than anger. He stared at Arthas, aghast. “This urn holds your
father’s ashes, Arthas! What, were you hoping to piss on them one last time before you left his kingdom
to rot?”
 A sudden jolt went through Arthas.
 Father—
 “I didn’t know what it held,” he murmured, as much to himself as to Uther. So this was the second
reason the dreadlord had smirked as he had given Arthas his instructions. He, at least, had known
what the urn contained. Test after test. Could Arthas fight his mentor…could he blaspheme his father’s
ashes. Arthas was growing sick of it. He harnessed that anger as he spoke, dismounting and drawing
Frostmourne.
 “Nor does it matter. I’ll take what I came for one way or another.”
 Frostmourne was almost humming now, in his mind and in his hand, eager for the battle. Arthas
settled into attack position. Uther regarded him for a moment, then slowly lifted his own glowing
weapon.
 “I didn’t want to believe it,” he said, his voice gruff, and Arthas realized with horror that tears stood
in Uther’s eyes. “When you were younger and selfish, I called it a child’s failing. When you pushed on
stubbornly, I dismissed it as a youth’s need to move out from under his father’s shadow. And
Stratholme—aye, Light forgive me, even that—I prayed you would find your own path to see the error
of your judgment. I could not stand against my liege’s son.”
 Arthas forced a smile as the two began to circle each other. “But now you do.”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 142
 “It was my last promise to your father. To my friend. I would see his remains treated with reverence,
even after his own son brutally slaughtered him, unaware and unarmed.”
 “You’ll die for that promise.”
 “Possibly.” It didn’t seem to bother Uther much. “I’d rather die honoring that promise than live at
your mercy. I’m glad he’s dead. I’m glad he doesn’t have to see what you’ve become.”
 The remark…hurt. Arthas hadn’t expected it to. He paused, emotions warring within him, and
Uther, ever the better in their bouts, used that brief hesitation to charge forward. “For the Light!” he
cried, pulling the hammer back and swinging it at Arthas with all his strength. The gleaming weapon
arced at Arthas so swiftly he could hear the sound of its movement.
 He leaped aside, barely in time, and felt the air brush his face as the weapon rushed past. Uther’s
expression was calm and focused…and deadly. It was his duty as he saw it to slay the betraying son, and
stop the spread of evil.
 Just as Arthas knew it was his duty to slay the man who had once mentored him. He needed to kill
his past…all of his past. Or else it would forever reach out with the deceptively sweet hope of
compassion and forgiveness. With an incoherent cry, Arthas brought Frostmourne down.
 Uther’s hammer blocked it. The two men strained, their faces within inches of each other, the
muscles in their arms shaking with effort, until with a grunt Uther shoved Arthas backward. The
younger man stumbled. Uther pressed the attack. His face was calm, but his eyes were fierce and
resolute, and he seemed to fight as if his victory was inevitable. The utter confidence shook Arthas. His
own blows were powerful, but erratic. He’d never been able to best Uther before—
 “It ends here, boy!” Uther cried, his voice ringing. Suddenly to Arthas’s horror the paladin was
limned in a glowing, brilliant light. Not just his hammer, but his entire body, as if he himself was the
true weapon of the Light that would strike Arthas down. “For the Light’s justice!”
 The hammer descended. All the air in Arthas’s body was knocked out of him with a rush as the blow
landed straight and true across his midsection. Only his armor saved him, and even that crumpled
beneath the glowing hammer wielded by the holy, radiant paladin. Arthas went sprawling,
Frostmourne flying from his grip, agony shooting through him as he struggled to breathe, struggled to
rise. The Light—he had turned his back on it, had betrayed it. And now it was exacting retribution
through Uther the Lightbringer, its greatest champion, infusing his old teacher with the purity of its
brilliance and purpose.
 The glow enveloping Uther increased, and Arthas grimaced in agony as the Light seared his eyes as
well as his soul. He’d been wrong to forsake it, horribly wrong, and now its mercy and love had been
transformed into this radiant, implacable being. He stared upward into the white light that was
Uther’s eyes, tears filling his own as he awaited the killing blow.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 143
 Had he grasped the sword without realizing it, or had it leaped into his hands of its own volition?
In the swirling mental chaos that was that moment, Arthas could not tell. All he knew was that
suddenly, his hands were closing on Frostmourne’s hilt, and its voice was in his mind.
 Every Light has its shadow—every day has its night—and even the brightest candle can be snuffed
out.
 And so can the brightest life.
 He let out a gulping inhalation, sucking breath into his lungs, and for just a second, Arthas saw the
Light enveloping Uther dim. Then Uther lifted the hammer again, ready to deal the killing blow.
 But Arthas was not there.
 If Uther was a bear, enormous and powerful, Arthas was a tiger, strong and coiled and swift. The
hammer, strong and Light- blessed though it and its weilder might be, was not a fast weapon, nor was
Uther’s style of fighting. Frostmourne, however, though it was an enormous two handed runeblade,
seemed to almost be able to fight on its own.
 He moved forward again, no hesitancy this time, and began to fight in earnest. He gave no quarter
as he attacked Uther the Lightbringer; offered no moment’s breathing space for the paladin to draw
back the weapon to deliver a crushing blow. Uther’s eyes widened with shock, then narrowed in
determination. But the Light that had once surged so brightly from his powerful frame was
diminishing with each passing second.
 Diminishing before the power granted to him by the Lich King.
 Again and again Frostmourne landed—here on the hammer’s glowing head, here on the shaft, here
on Uther’s shoulder, in that narrow space between gorget and shoulder pauldrons, biting deep—
 Uther grunted and staggered back. Blood poured from the wound. Frostmourne craved more, and
Arthas wanted to give it more.
 Snarling like a beast, his white hair flying, he pressed the attack. The hammer, great and glowing,
fell from Uther’s nerveless fingers as Frostmourne nearly severed the arm. A blow dented Uther’s
breastplate; a second in the same spot cleaved it and tore at the flesh beneath. Uther’s tabard, the blue
and gold of the Alliance he had once fought for, fluttered to the snow- covered earth in pieces as Uther
the Lightbringer fell heavily to his knees. He looked up. His breathing came with difficulty. Blood
trickled from his mouth, seeping into his beard, but there was no hint of surrender on his face.
 “I dearly hope that there’s a special place in hell waiting for you, Arthas.” He coughed, the blood
bubbling up.
 “We may never know, Uther,” Arthas said coldly, lifting Frostmourne for the final blow. The sword
nearly sang in anticipation. “I intend to live forever.”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 144
 He brought the runeblade straight down, through Uther’s throat, silencing the defiant words,
piercing the great heart. Uther died almost immediately. Arthas tugged the blade free and stepped
back, shaking. Surely, it was only from the release of tension and exultation.
 He knelt and picked up the urn. He held it for a long moment, then slowly broke the seal and tipped
the jar over, pouring out its contents. The ashes of King Terenas fell like gray rain, like plagued flour,
drifting down onto the snow. Abruptly, the wind shifted. The gray powder that was all that was left of
a king suddenly took flight, as if animated, whirling to shower the death knight. Startled, Arthas took a
step backward. His hands automatically came up to shield his face, and he dropped the urn, which
landed with a dull thunk on the ground. He shut his eyes and turned away, but not quickly enough,
and began to cough violently, the ashes acrid and choking. Abruptly, panic seized him. His gauntleted
hands came up to swipe at his face, trying to wipe off the fine powder that clogged his throat and nose
and stung his eyes. He spat, and for a moment his stomach roiled.
 Arthas took a deep breath and forced calm upon himself. A moment later, he rose, composed once
again. If he felt anything at all, he had locked it so deep he did not know it. Stone- faced, he returned to
the wagon that bore the reeking, nearly liquid remains of Kel’Thuzad and shoved it at one of the
Scourge.
 “Put the necromancer in here,” he ordered.
 He mounted Invincible.
 Quel’Thalas was not far.
 World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
 During the six days it took to reach the high elven lands, Arthas spoke with the shade of
Kel’Thuzad and gathered many, many more to his side.
 From Andorhal eastward he went, the meat wagons grinding along in his wake, past the little
hamlets of Felstone Field, Dalson’s Orchard, and Gahrron’s Quickening, across the Thondroril River
into the eastern part of Lordaeron. Risen plague victims were everywhere, and a simple mental
command brought them to heel like faithful hounds. Care of them was easy—they fed on the dead. It
was very…tidy.
 These Arthas was expecting to come to his side; the plague victims, the abominations sewn
together of many parts, the ghosts of the fallen. But a new ally joined him—one that startled, appalled,
and then delighted him.
 His army was halfway to Quel’Thalas when he first saw them. Far in the distance, it first appeared
as if the earth itself was moving. No, that wasn’t right. These were beasts, of a sort. Cattle or sheep,
that had broken out of their pens when their owners turned into the walking dead? Bears or wolves,
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 145
foraging and feasting on corpses? And then Arthas gasped and grasped Frostmourne tightly, his eyes
wide with shock and disbelief.
 They did not move like four- legged creatures. They scuttled, scurried, moving over the hills and
grasses like—
 “Spiders,” he murmured.
 Now they poured down the slopes, purple and black and dangerous- looking, multiple legs
scurrying quickly to bear them to Arthas. They were coming for him—they—
 “These are the new warriors the Lich King sends to his favored one,” came Kel’Thuzad’s voice. The
ghost apparently could be heard and seen only by Arthas, and he had been doing a great deal of talking
in the last few days. He had recently focused on sowing the seeds of suspicion in the death knight’s
mind. Not of himself—of Tichondrius and the other demons. “The dreadlords cannot be trusted,” he
had said. “They are the Lich King’s jailors. I will tell you all…when I walk this world again.”
 They had had enough time; Arthas wondered if Kel’Thuzad was dangling the information in front
of him like bait, to ensure that Arthas completed the task.
 Now Arthas asked, “He sent these…to me? What are they?”
 “They once were nerubians,” Kel’Thuzad said. “Descendants of an ancient and proud race called the
aqir. In life, they were fiercly intelligent, their will dedicated to wiping out any who were not like
themselves.”
 Arthas eyed the arachnid creatures with a shiver of disgust. “Lovely. And now?”
 “Now, these are those who fell battling the one we serve. He has raised them and their lord,
Anub’arak, into undeath, and now they come to aid you, Prince Arthas. To serve his glory and yours.”
 “Undead spiders,” Arthas mused. They were huge, hideous, deadly. They came chittering and
scuttling, merging into step with the corpses, specters, and abominations. “To fight the elves of
Quel’Thalas.”
 This Lich King, whomever he was, had a flair for the dramatic.
 Arthas’s coming, of course, was witnessed. The elves bred notoriously fine scouts. Chances were by
the time Arthas himself noticed them, word had already gone ahead. It didn’t matter. The force he had
assembled had grown to a truly impressive size, and he had no doubt, despite Kel’Thuzad’s fretful
warnings, that he would be able to gain entry into the wondrous, eternal land, move through it swiftly,
and reach the Sunwell.
 They had captured a prisoner, a young priest who in an act of defiance had inadvertently revealed
some important information. Arthas would use the information wisely and well. Too, there was
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 146
another, one who, unlike the priest, would willingly betray his people and their land for the power that
Arthas and the Lich King had promised him.
 It surprised the death knight how readily this elven mage had turned. Surprised, and unsettled him.
Arthas had once been loved by his people, as his father before him had been. He had enjoyed basking
in the warm approval from those who served under him. He had taken time to learn their names, to
listen to stories of their families. He had wanted them to love him. And they had, following him loyally,
as Captain Falric had done.
 But Arthas had to assume that the elven leaders, too, loved their people. Assumed, as Arthas
assumed, that they would stay loyal. And yet this mage had betrayed his people for nothing more than
the mere promise of power, the simple, glittering allure of it.
 Mortals could be corrupted. Mortals could be swayed, or bought.
 He looked over his current army and smiled. Yes…this was better. There was no question of loyalty
when those he led could do nothing but obey.

 “It is true,” the scout gasped. “All of it.”
 Sylvanas Windrunner, Ranger- General of Silvermoon, knew this elf well. Kelmarin’s information
was always accurate and detailed. She listened, wanting to disbelieve, knowing she did not dare.
 They had all heard the rumors, of course. That some sort of plague had begun to creep across the
human lands. But the quel’dorei had thought themselves safe here in their homeland. It had withstood
attacks from dragons, orcs, and trolls over the centuries. Surely, what was occurring in the human
lands would not touch them.
 Except it had.
 “You are sure it is Arthas Menethil? The prince?”
 Kelmarin nodded, still catching his breath. “Aye, my lady. I heard him called so by those who served
him. I do not think the rumors painting him as the slayer of his father and the instigator of the troubles
in Lordaeron are exaggerations, from what I have seen.”
 Sylvanas listened, her blue eyes widening, as the scout spun a tale that sounded too fantastical to be
believed. Risen corpses, both fresh and desiccated. Enormous, mindless patchwork creations of
various body parts; strange beasts who could fly and looked like stone creations come to life; giant
spiderlike beings that reminded her of tales of the thought- vanished aqir. And the smell—Kelmarin,
who was not given to exaggeration, spoke in halting tones about the reek that preceded the army. The
forests, the first bastion of defense of the land, were falling beneath the strange engines of war he had
brought with him. Sylvanas thought back to the red dragons, which had set the woods aflame not so
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 147
very long ago. Silvermoon had endured, of course, but the woodlands had suffered terribly. As they
were suffering now….
 “My lady,” Kelmarin finished, lifting his head and giving her a stricken gaze. “If he breaks through—
I do not think we have the numbers to defeat him.”
 The bitter statement gave her the anger she needed. “We are quel’dorei,” she snapped,
straightening. “Our land is impregnable. He will not enter. Do not fear. He must first know how to
break the enchantments that protect Quel’Thalas. Then he must be able to do so. Better and wiser foes
than he have tried to take our realm ere now. Have faith, my friend. In the Sunwell’s strength…and in
the strength and will of our people.”
 As Kelmarin was led off to where he could drink and eat and recover before returning to his post,
Sylvanas turned to her rangers. “I would see this human prince for myself. Summon the first battle
units. If Kelmarin is correct…we should prepare for a preemptive strike.”

 Sylvanas lay atop the great gate that, along with the jagged ring of mountains, helped protect her
land. She wore full but comfortable leather armor, and her bow was slung across her back. She and
Sheldaris and Vor’athil, the other two scouts who had gone on ahead and had waited for her to come
with the bulk of the rangers, stared, aghast. As Kelmarin had warned, they had smelled the reek of the
decaying army long before they had seen them.
 Prince Arthas rode atop a skeletal horse with fiery eyes, a huge sword that she recognized at once as
a runeblade strapped to his back. Humans in dark clothing scurried to obey his commands. So did the
dead. Sylvanas choked back bile as her gaze roved over the collection of various rotting corpses, and
she was silently thankful that the wind had shifted and was now blowing the stench away from her.
 She signaled her plan, long fingers moving quickly, and the scouts nodded. They slipped back,
silent as shadows, and Sylvanas turned her eyes toward Arthas. He did not seem to have noticed
anything. He looked human, still, though pale, and his hair was white instead of golden, as she recalled
it had been described to her. How then, could he stand this? Being surrounded by the dead—the
horrible stench, the grotesque images…
 She shuddered and instructed herself to focus. The undead who obeyed him simply stood, awaiting
orders. The humans—necromancers, Sylvanas thought, a wave of loathing rushing through her—were
too busy creating new monstrosities to post lookouts. They could not conceive of defeat.
 Their arrogance would be their undoing.
 She waited, watching, until her archers were in position. Forewarned by Kelmarin, she had
summoned fully two thirds of her rangers. She believed firmly that Arthas could not breech the magical
elfgates that protected Quel’Thalas. There was too much he could not possibly know about them to do
so. Still…she had also not believed things that her eyes now told her was truth. Better to wipe out the
threat here and now.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 148
 She glanced at Sheldaris and Vor’athil. They caught her gaze and nodded. They were ready.
Sylvanas yearned to simply strike, to take the enemy unawares, but honor forbade it. There would be
no tales sung of how Ranger- General Sylvanas Windrunner defended her homeland by underhanded
means.
 “For Quel’Thalas,” she whispered underneath her breath, and then stood.
 “You are not welcome here!” she cried, her voice clear and musical and strong. Arthas turned his
skeletal steed—Sylvanas spared a moment to pity the poor beast—and faced her, peering at her
intently. The necromancers fell silent, turning to their lord, awaiting instructions.
 “I am Sylvanas Windrunner, Ranger- General of Silvermoon. I advise you to turn back now.”
 Arthas’s lips—gray, she noticed, gray in a white face, although she knew somehow he yet lived—
curled back in a smile. He was amused.
 “It is you who should turn back, Sylvanas,” he said, deliberately omitting her title. His voice would
have been a pleasant baritone had it not been underscored by…something. Something that made even
her fierce heart stop for a moment as she heard it. She forced herself not to shiver. “Death itself has
come to your land.”
 Her blue eyes narrowed. “Do your worst,” she challenged. “The elfgate to the inner kingdom is
protected by our most powerful enchantments. You shall not pass.”
 She nocked her bow—the signal for the attack. An instant later, the air was filled with the sudden
hum of dozens of arrows in flight. Sylvanas had taken aim for the human—or once- human—prince,
and her aim was as true as ever. The arrow sang as it sped toward Arthas’s unprotected head. But an
instant before it struck, she saw a flash of blue- white.
 Sylvanas stared. More swiftly than she could fathom, Arthas had brought up his sword, the runes in
it emitting that cold blue- white glow, and sliced the arrow in two. He grinned at her and winked.
 “To battle, my troops—slay them all, that they may serve me and my lord!” Arthas cried. His voice
echoed with that strange thrum of power. She growled deep in her throat and took aim again. But he
was in motion now, the dead horse bearing him with unnatural swiftness, and she realized that his
horrific troops were on the offensive now.
 She thought of a swarm of insects as they converged, perfect in their mindless unity, upon her
rangers. The archers had their instructions—cut down the living first, and then dispatch the dead with
arrows set aflame. The first volley of arrows dropped nearly every single one of the cultists. The second
saw dozens of blazing arrows embedded in the walking corpses. But even as they stumbled about,
some of them almost tinder- dry, others moist and rotting, the sheer number of them began to turn the
tide.
 They somehow managed to scramble up the nearly- vertical walls of earth and stone where her
rangers were positioned. Some of them, mercifully, were too decayed to get far, their rotting limbs
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 149
ripping from their bodies and causing them to fall. But the fall did not halt them. They pressed
onward, upward, toward her rangers who now had to wield swords instead of arrows. They were
trained warriors, of course, and could fight in close quarters. Fight against foes who could be slowed
by the loss of blood, or limbs. But against these—
 Dead hands, more like claws than fingers, reached out to Sheldaris. Grim faced, the red- haired
ranger fought fiercely, her lips moving in cries of defiance that Sylvanas could not hear. But they were
closing in on her, ringing her, and Sylvanas felt a deep pain as she watched Sheldaris fall beneath them.
 She drew and fired, drew and fired, almost quicker than thought, focusing on her duty. Out of the
corner of her eye she saw one of the grotesque winged creatures, its skin gray and appearing as hard as
stone, swoop down within ten feet of her. Its batlike face snarled in glee as it reached down and, as
easily as she might pluck ripe fruit from the tree, snatched Vor’athil and bore him aloft. Its fingers dug
deeply into the scout’s shoulders, and blood spattered on Sylvanas as the thing swooped upward with
its prize.
 Vor’athil struggled in the creature’s grasp, his fingers finding and freeing a dagger. Sylvanas turned
her aim from the groaning undead below her to the monstrosity above. She fired, right at the creature’s
neck.
 The arrow glanced off harmlessly. The creature tossed its head and snarled, tiring of toying with
Vor’athil. It lifted one hand and raked its claws across the scout’s throat, then dropped him carelessly
and circled back for more.
 Grieving silently, Sylvanas watched her friend fall lifeless to the earth, his body striking the pile of
dead cultists her rangers had slain moments earlier.
 And then she gasped.
 The cultists were moving.
 Arrows protruding from their bodies, sometimes over a dozen brightly fletched missiles in a single
corpse, and yet they stirred.
 “No,” she whispered, sickened. Her horrified gaze went to Arthas.
 The prince was looking straight at her, grinning that damnable grin. One powerful, gauntleted
hand grasped the runeblade. The other was lifted in a beckoning gesture, and as she watched, yet
another slain human stirred and shambled to its feet, pulling out the arrow from its eye as if it were
plucking a burr from its clothing. Her attack had cost Arthas nothing. Any who fell would be raised by
his dark magic. He saw the realization and the anger in her eyes, and the grin turned into a laugh.
 “I did try to tell you,” he cried, his voice rising above the din of battle. “And still you provide me with
new recruits….”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 150
 He gestured again, and another body twitched as it was hauled upward and forced to stand on its
feet. A body that had been slender but muscular, with long black hair swept back in a ponytail, with
tanned skin and pointed ears. Blood still ran in red rivulets from the four scores in its throat, and the
head bobbed erratically, as if the neck had been too badly damaged to support it much longer. Dead
eyes that had once been blue as summer skies sought out Sylvanas. And then, slowly at first, it began to
move toward her.
 Vor’athil.
 At that moment she felt the gate beneath her shudder, ever so slightly. So distracted had she been
by the slaughter and reanimation of things that ought to stay dead that she had not noticed his siege
engines maneuvering into position. The ogre- sized things that appeared to be comprised of various
different corpses were battering away at the gate as well. So were the enormous, spiderlike creatures.
 Then something hit the wall with a soft, plopping sound. Wetness spattered Sylvanas. For a
fraction of a second, her mind refused to accept what she had just witnessed, and then clarity broke
upon her.
 Arthas was not only raising the corpses of the fallen elves. He was hurling their bodies—or pieces of
them—back at Sylvanas as ammunition.
 Sylvanas swallowed hard, then issued the order that a few moments ago she never would have
dreamed she would utter.
 “Shindu fallah na! Fall back to the second gate! Fall back!”
 Those who were left—ai, piteous few there were still, at least still alive and fighting under her
command—obeyed at once, gathering up the wounded and slinging them over their shoulders, their
faces pale and sweat- streaked and reflecting the same forcibly contained terror that raced through her.
They fled. There was no other word for it. This was no orderly, synchronized, martial retreat, but an
all- out flight. Sylvanas ran with the rest of them, bearing the wounded as best she could, and her mind
was racing.
 Behind her she heard the once- inconceivable sound of the gate cracking and the roar of the undead
as they howled their triumph. Her own heart seemed to crack in agony.
 He had done it—but how? How?
 His voice, strong, resonant, with that undercurrent of something dark and terrible, rose over the
noise. “The elfgate has fallen! Onward, my warriors! Onward to victory!”
 Somehow, to Sylvanas, the worst, most awful thing about that gleeful, gloating cry was the…
affection…that laced through it.
 She seized the sleeve of a young man racing beside her. “Tel’kor,” Sylvanas cried. “Make for the
Sunwell Plateau. Tell them what we have seen here. Tell them—to be prepared.”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 151
 Tel’kor was young enough to let disappointment flicker over his handsome features at the thought
of not standing to fight, but he nodded his golden head in comprehension. Sylvanas hesitated.
 “My lady?”
 “Tell them—we may have been betrayed.”
 Tel’kor blanched at that, but nodded. Like an arrow shot from a bow, he raced away. He was a
good archer, but Sylvanas did not suffer any illusion that one more bow would make a difference in the
battle that was to come. But if the magi who controlled and directed the Sunwell’s energies knew what
they faced—that might.
 They were racing northward now, and as her troops crossed a bridge she suddenly stopped in midrun, whirled on her heel, and looked back.
 Sylvanas gasped. That Arthas and his dark army were coming, she expected to see. That would
have been a horrific enough sight; the undead, the abominations, the flying batlike things, the
grotesque spidery beings—hundreds, bearing down with implacable determination. What she did not
expect to see was what they left in their wake.
 Like a trail left by a slug, like a furrow left by a plow, the land where the undead feet had trod was
blackened and barren. Worse; Sylvanas remembered the burned woods the orcs had left behind, knew
that nature would eventually reclaim it. This—it was a horrible dark line of death, as if the unnatural
energies that were used to propel the corpses forward were killing the very earth upon which they
shambled. Poison, they were poison, it was dark magic of the foulest kind.
 And it had to be stopped.
 She had paused only an instant, although to her it felt as though she had been frozen in place for a
lifetime. “Hold!” she cried, her voice clear and strong and purposeful. “We will make our stand here.”
 They were puzzled only briefly, then they understood. Quickly she spoke instructions, and they
leaped to obey. Many of them paused, shocked, as they caught their first stunned glimpse of the
grievous wound to the land that had so horrified their ranger- general, but they recovered quickly.
Time enough to worry about healing the brutalized earth later. For now, they had to stop that dreadful
scar from spreading.
 The stench preceded the army, but Sylvanas and her rangers now had a grim familiarity with it. It
did not unnerve them as it had before. She stood on the bridge, her head held high, her black hood
slipping a little to show bright golden hair. The army of the dead slowed and halted, confused by the
sight. The ugly wagons, catapults, and trebuchets rumbled to a halt. Arthas’s skeletal horse reared, and
he reached down and stroked the bony neck as if it were a living beast. Sylvanas felt a shiver of nausea
at the wrongness of the tableau as the thing responded to its master’s touch.
 “Goodness,” Arthas said, humor lacing the word with something akin to warmth. “This can’t be one
of the oh- so- imposing elfgates I’ve heard so much about.”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 152
 Sylvanas forced herself to grin back. “No, not quite. But you’ll still find it a challenge.”
 “It is but a simple bridge, my lady. But then again, the elves are very fond of putting paper manes on
cats and calling them lions.”
 She eyed his army for a moment, her anger penetrating her forced smugness. “You’ve won through
this gate, butcher, but you won’t get through the second. The inner gate to Silvermoon can only be
opened with a special key, and it shall never be yours!”
 She nodded to her companions, and they raced across the bridge to join their fellows on the other
side.
 Arthas’s humor faded and his pale eyes flashed. His gauntleted hand tightened on the runeblade. Its
markings thrummed. “You waste your time, woman. You cannot outrun the inevitable. Though I
admit it is amusing to watch you scurry.”
 Now Sylvanas did laugh, an angry, satisfied sound that rolled up from some place deep in her soul.
“You think I’m running from you? Apparently you’ve never fought elves before.”
 Some things, she mused, were deliciously simple. Sylvanas lifted her hand, threw the extremely nonmagical, quite practical incendiary device, then turned to run as the bridge exploded. The trees
welcomed them, arching above them in hues of gold and silver, hiding them from their enemy. Before
she faded from earshot, she heard something that made her grin fiercely.
 “The ranger woman is starting to vex me greatly.”
 Yes. Vex you. Harry you like a sparrow does the hawk. The Elrendar bisects Eversong Woods, and
you will find no crossing for your monstrous engines of war any time soon. She knew it was a delay,
nothing more. But if the army was delayed long enough, perhaps she could get a message through.
 Worry fluttered at her mind. Arthas had seemed supremely confident that he would be able to
defeat the magic that powered the elfgates. He had already shown some knowledge in that he had
been able to destroy the first gate. Of course, the first gate was not as magically defended as the second.
And, from what she had seen, arrogance seemed to be his normal state, but—was it possible? The
nagging uncertainty that had prompted her to add a final warning to Tel’kor’s message to the magi
stirred within her again.
 Did Arthas know about the key?
 World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 CHAPTER NINETEEN
 The traitor, a wizard by the name of Dar’Khan Drathir, should have made it easy. And to some
extent he had, of course. Arthas would otherwise never have known about the Key of the Three Moons
—a magical item that had been split into three separate mooncrystals stashed in heavily- guarded,
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 153
hidden locations throughout Quel’Thalas. Each temple was constructed on an intersection of ley lines,
similar to the Sunwell itself, the traitorous elf had told him, gleeful to be betraying his people so. The
ley lines were like blood vessels of the earth, carrying magic instead of scarlet fluid. Thus
interconnected, the crystals created a field of energy known as Ban’dinoriel—the Gatekeeper. All he
needed to do was find these sites at An’telas, An’daroth, and An’owyn, slay the guards, and find the
mooncrystals.
 But the excessively pretty, surprisingly tough elves presented a challenge. Arthas sat astride
Invincible, idly fingering Frostmourne, and reflected on how it was that so fragile- seeming a race
could stand up to his army. For army now it truly was—many hundreds of soldiers, all already dead and
so more difficult to permanently dispatch.
 The ranger- general’s clever little trick of blowing up the bridge had indeed cost Arthas precious
time. The river ran through Quel’Thalas until it bumped up against several foothills to the east—
foothills that posed the same challenge to the mobility of his engines of war that the water did.
 It had taken a while, but eventually they had crossed the river. As he pondered the solution,
something had twinged at the back of his mind, a tingling sensation he couldn’t quite figure out.
Annoyed, he dismissed the strange sensation and instructed several of his unfailingly loyal soldiers to
create their own bridge—a bridge made of rotting flesh. Dozens of them waded into the river and
simply lay there, forming layer upon layer of corpses, until there were enough of them that the meat
wagons, catapults, and trebuchets could make their lurching way across. Some of the undead, of
course, were no longer of use, their bodies too broken or torn to hold cohesion. These Arthas almost
gently released from his control, granting them true death. Besides, their bodies would foul the purity
of the river. It was an additional weapon.
 He, of course, could and did cross easily. Invincible plunged without hesitation into the water, and
Arthas was abruptly reminded of the horse’s fatal jump in the middle of winter, slipping on the icy
rocks as he leaped, utterly obedient to the will of his master then as now. The memory crashed on him
unexpectedly, and for a moment he couldn’t breathe as pain and guilt washed over him.
 It was gone as quickly as it had come. Everything was better now. He was no longer an emotionally
shattered child, racked by guilt and shame, sobbing in the snow as he lifted his sword to pierce the
heart of a loyal friend. No, nor was Invincible a mere living creature, to be harmed by such a thing.
They were both more powerful now. Stronger. Invincible would exist forever, serving his master, as he
had always done. He would not know thirst, or pain, or hunger, or exhaustion. And he, Arthas, would
take what he wished when he wished it. There was no more silent disapproval from his father, no more
scolding from the too- pious Uther. No more dubious glances from Jaina, her brow furrowed in that
dearly familiar expression of—
 Jaina…
 Arthas shook his head sharply. Jaina had had her chance to join with him. She had refused. Denied
him, although she had sworn she would never do so. He owed her nothing. Only the Lich King
commanded him now. The mental shift calmed him, and Arthas smiled and patted the jutting
vertebrae of the undead beast, who tossed his bony head in response. Surely, it was the beautiful and
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 154
willful ranger- general who had unsettled him and made him question, even momentarily, the wisdom
of his path. She, too, had had her chance. Arthas had come for a purpose, and that purpose had not
been to obliterate Quel’Thalas and its populace. Had they not resisted him, he would have let them be.
Her sharp tongue and defiant behavior had brought her people’s doom upon them, not he.
 The water seeped in through the joins of his armor and the breeches, shirt, and gambeson he wore
beneath the metal plate grew wet and cold. Arthas did not feel it. A moment later Invincible surged
forward, clambering out onto the opposite bank. The last of the meat wagons rumbled onto the bank
as well, and what corpses were sufficiently intact slogged onto land. The rest lay where they had fallen,
the once- crystal clear water flowing over and around them.
 “Onward,” the death knight said.

 The rangers had retreated to Fairbreeze Village. Once the shock had passed, the citizens did
everything they could, from tending the wounded to offering what weapons and skills they had.
Sylvanas ordered those who could not fight to head to Silvermoon as quickly as possible.
 “Take nothing,” she said as a woman nodded and hurried to ascend the ramp to an upper area.
 “But our rooms upstairs have—”
 Sylvanas whirled, her eyes flaring. “Do you not yet understand? The dead are marching upon us!
They do not tire, they do not slow, and they take our fallen and add them to their ranks! We have
delayed them, little more. Take your family and go!”
 The woman seemed taken aback by the ranger- general’s response, but obeyed, wasting only a few
moments rounding up her family before hastening down the road to the capital.
 Arthas would not be stopped for long. Sylvanas cast a sweeping, appraising glance over the
wounded. None of them could stay here. They, too, would need to be evacuated to Silvermoon. As for
those who were still hale, few though they were, she would need to ask yet more from them. Perhaps
everything they had. They, like she, had sworn to defend their people. Now was the day of reckoning.
 There was a spire close by, between the Elrendar and Silvermoon. Somehow, she felt certain
Arthas would find a way to cross and continue his march. Continue to wound the land with the
purplish- black scar. The spire would be a good place to mount a defense. The ramps were narrow,
preventing the crush of undead that had been so disastrous previously, and there were several stories to
the building, all open to the air. She and her archers could do a great deal of damage before they were
—
 Sylvanas Windrunner, Ranger- General of Silvermoon, took a calming breath, dashed water on her
heated face, drank a deep draft of the soothing liquid, and rose to prepare the uninjured and walking
wounded for what would no doubt be their final battle.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 155

 They were almost too late.
 Even as the rangers marched on the spire that would be their bastion, the air, once so sweet and
fresh, was tainted with the sickly odor of putrefaction. Overhead, mounted archers hovered on their
dragonhawks. The great creatures, golden and scarlet, stretched their serpentine heads against the
reins unhappily. They, too, scented death, and it disturbed them. Never had the beautiful beasts been
pressed into such a ghastly service. One of the riders signaled Sylvanas, and she signaled back.
 “The undead have been sighted,” she told her troops calmly. They nodded. “Positions. Hurry.”
 Like a well- oiled gnomish machine, they obeyed. The dragonhawk riders surged south, toward the
approaching enemy. A unit of archers and hand- to- hand fighters hurried forward as well, the first line
of defense. Her finest archers raced up the curving ramps of the spire. The rest spread out at the base
of the structure.
 They did not have long to wait.
 If she had harbored any faint hope that somehow the numbers of the enemy might have suffered
from the delay, it was dashed like fine crystal falling to a stone floor. She could glimpse the hideous
vanguard now: rotting undead, followed by skeletons and the huge abominations whose three arms
each carried massive weapons. Above them flew the stonelike creatures wheeling like buzzards.
 They are breaking through….
 How strange the mind was, Sylvanas thought with a trace of macabre humor. Now, as the hour of
her death doubtless approached, an ancient song played in her head; one she and her siblings had loved
to sing, when the world was right and they were all together, Alleria, Vereesa, and their youngest
brother, Lirath, at twilight when soft lavender shadows spread their gentle cloaks and the sweet scent
of the ocean and flowers wafted across the land.
 Anar’alah, anar’alah belore, quel’dorei, shindu fallah na…. By the light, by the light of the sun, high
elves, our enemies are breaking through….
 Without her realizing it at first, her hand fluttered upward to close on the necklace she wore about
her slender throat. It had been a gift, from her oldest sister, Alleria; delivered not by Alleria herself, but
in her stead by one of her lieutenants, Verana. Alleria was gone, vanished through the Dark Portal in
an attempt to stop the Horde from visiting their atrocities again on Azeroth and on other worlds as
well.
 She had never returned. She had melted down a necklace given to her by their parents, and made
individual necklaces out of the three stones for each of the Windrunner sisters. Sylvanas’s was a
sapphire. She knew the inscription by heart: To Sylvanas. Love always, Alleria.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 156
 She waited, grasping the necklace, feeling the connection with her dead sister it always provided,
then slowly forced her hand away. Sylvanas took a deep breath and shouted, “Attack! For
Quel’Thalas!”
 There would be no stopping them. In truth, she did not expect to stop them. From the expressions
on the grim, bloodied faces around her, Sylvanas realized her rangers knew this as well as she. Sweat
dewed her face. Her muscles screamed with exhaustion, and still Sylvanas Windrunner fought. She
fired, nocking and releasing and nocking again so swiftly that her hands were almost a blur. When the
swarm of corpses and monsters came too close for arrows, she flung her bow away and seized her short
sword and dagger. She whirled and turned and stabbed, crying out incoherently as she battled.
 Another one fell, its head toppling from its shoulders to be trampled, bursting open like a melon
beneath the feet of one of its own. Two more monstrocities surged forward to take its place. Still
Sylvanas fought like one of the savage lynxes of Eversong Woods, channeling her pain and outrage into
violence. She would take as many with her as she could before she fell.
 They are breaking through….
 They pressed in, close, the reek of decay almost overwhelming her. Too many of them now.
Sylvanas did not slow. She would fight until they had utterly destroyed her, until—
 The press of corpses suddenly was gone. They stepped back and stood still. Gasping for breath,
Sylvanas looked down the hill.
 He was there, waiting on his undead steed. The wind played with his long white hair as he
regarded her intently. She straightened, wiping blood and sweat from her face. A paladin, he had been
once. Her sister had loved one such as him. Suddenly Sylvanas was fiercely glad that Alleria was dead,
could not see this, could not see what a former champion of the Light was doing to everything the
Windrunners loved and cherished.
 Arthas lifted the glowing runeblade in a formal gesture. “I salute your bravery, elf, but the chase is
over.” Oddly, he sounded like he meant the compliment.
 Sylvanas swallowed; her mouth was dry as bone. She tightened her grip on her weapons. “Then I’ll
make my stand here, butcher. Anar’alah belore.”
 His gray lips twitched. “As you will, Ranger- General.”
 He did not even bother to dismount. Instead the skeletal steed whinnied and galloped straight
toward her. Arthas gripped the reins with his left hand, his right drawing back the massive sword.
Sylvanas sobbed, once. No cry of fear or regret came from those lips. Only a short, harsh sob of
impotent anger, of hatred, of righteous fury that she was not able to stop them, not even when she had
given all she could, not even with her life’s blood.
 Alleria, sister, I come.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 157
 She met the deadly blade head- on, striking it with her own weapons, which shattered upon impact.
And then the runeblade had pierced her. Cold, so cold it was, slicing through her as if it was made of
ice itself.
 Arthas leaned in to her, his gaze locked with hers. Sylvanas coughed, fine droplets of blood
spattering his bone- pale face. Was it her imagination, or was there a hint of regret on his still- fine
features?
 He tugged back his weapon and she fell, blood gushing out of her. Sylvanas shivered on the cold
stone floor, the movement causing agony to rip through her. One hand fluttered, foolishly, to the
gaping wound in her abdomen, as if her hands could close on it and stop the flood.
 “Finish it,” she whispered. “I deserve…a clean death.”
 His voice floated to her from somewhere as her eyes closed. “After all you’ve put me through,
woman, the last thing I’ll give you is the peace of death.”
 Fear spiked in her for a heartbeat, then faded as everything else was beginning to. He would raise
her, as one of those grotesque shambling things?
 “No,” she murmured, her voice sounding as if it came from a long way off. “You wouldn’t…dare….”
 And then it went away. It all went away. The coldness, the stench, the searing pain. It was soft and
warm and dark and calm and comforting, and Sylvanas permitted herself to sink into the welcoming
darkness. At last she could rest, could lay down the arms she had borne for so long in service to her
people.
 And then—
 Agony shot through her, agony such as she had never known, and Sylvanas suddenly knew that no
physical pain she had ever endured could hold a pale candle to this torment. This was an agony of the
spirit, of her soul leaving her lifeless form and being trapped. Of a…ripping, tearing, yanking back from
that warm sanctuary of silence and stillness. The violence of the act added to the exquisite torment, and
Sylvanas felt a scream welling up, forcing its way from deep inside, past lips that somehow she knew
were no longer physical, a deep keening wail of a suffering that was not hers alone, that froze blood and
stopped hearts.
 The blackness faded from her vision, but colors did not return. She did not need reds or blues or
yellows to see him, though, her tormentor; he was white and gray and black even in a world with color.
The runeblade that had taken her life, had taken and consumed her soul, glittered and gleamed, and
Arthas’s free hand was lifted in a beckoning gesture as he ripped her from the soothing embrace of
death.
 “Banshee,” he told her. “Thus I have made you. You can give voice to your pain, Sylvanas. I will give
you that much. It is more than the others get. And in so doing, you shall cause pain to others. So now
you, troublesome ranger, shall serve.”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 158
 Terrified beyond reason, Sylvanas hovered over her bloodied, broken corpse, gazing into her own
staring eyes, then back at Arthas.
 “No,” she said, her voice hollow and eerie, yet still recognizably hers. “I will never serve you,
butcher.”
 He gestured. It was the merest thing, a twitch of a gauntleted finger. Her back arched in agony and
another scream was torn from her, and she realized with a racking, raging sense of grief that she was
utterly powerless before him. She was his tool, as the rotting corpses and the pale, reeking
abominations were his tools.
 “Your rangers serve as well,” he said. “They are now in my army.” He hesitated, and there was
genuine regret in his voice when he said, “It did not have to be this way. Know that your fate, theirs,
and that of your people, rests upon your choices. But I must press on to the Sunwell. And you will
assist me.”

 The hate grew inside Sylvanas like a living thing in her incorporeal body. She floated beside him,
his shiny new toy, her body gathered up and flung on one of the meat wagons to who knew what sick
end Arthas could devise. As if there was a thread that bound her to him, she never was more than a few
feet away from the death knight.
 And she was beginning to hear the whispers.
 At first, Sylvanas wondered if she was insane in this new, abhorrent incarnation. But it soon became
apparent that even the refuge of the mad was denied her. The voice in her mind was unintelligible at
first, and in her wretched state she did not wish to hear. But soon she understood to whom it
belonged.
 Arthas kept giving her sidelong glances as he continued his inexorable march to Silvermoon and
beyond, watching her closely. At one point, as this army of which she was a captive part surged
forward, destroying the land as it passed, she heard it very clearly.
 For my glory, you will serve, Sylvanas. For the dead, you will toil. For obedience, you will hunger.
Arthas is the first and most beloved of my death knights; he will command you forever, and you will
find it joyous.
 Arthas saw her shiver, and he smiled.
 If she had thought she despised him when she first beheld him outside the gates of Quel’Thalas,
when the wondrous land within was still clean and pure and had not known the killing touch; if she
had thought she hated him as his minions slew her people and raised them to become lifeless puppets,
and when he impaled her in a single, savage blow with the monstrous runeblade—it was as nothing to
what she felt now. A candle to a sun, a whisper to a banshee’s scream.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 159
 Never, she told the voice in her head. He directs my actions, but Arthas cannot break my will.
 The only answer was hollow, cold laughter.
 On they pushed, past Fairbreeze Village and the East Sanctum. At the gates of Silvermoon itself
they halted. Arthas’s voice should not have carried as it did, but Sylvanas knew that it was heard in
every corner of the city as he stood in front of the gates.
 “Citizens of Silvermoon! I have given you ample opportunities to surrender, but you have
stubbornly refused. Know that today, your entire race and your ancient heritage will end! Death itself
has come to claim the high home of the elves!”
 She, Ranger- General Sylvanas Windrunner, was paraded in front of her people as an example of
what would happen to them if they did not surrender. They did not, and she loved them fiercely for it
even as she was pressed into service by her dark master.
 And so it fell, the shining, beautiful city of magic, its glories shattered and reduced to rubble as the
army of undead—the Scourge, she heard Arthas call them, twisted affection in his voice—pressed on.
As he had before, Arthas raised the fallen to serve, and if Sylvanas had still possessed a heart, it would
have broken at the sight of so many friends and loved ones shambling beside her, mindlessly obedient.
On through the city they marched, cleaving it in twain with the vile purple- black scar, its citizens
lurching to their feet with wounds that had smashed skulls, or trailing viscera behind them as they
shambled forward.
 She had hoped the channel between Silvermoon and Quel’Danas would prove an impassable
barrier, and for a moment that hope seemed realized. Arthas drew rein, staring at the blue water
glinting in the sun, and frowned. For a moment he sat atop his unnatural steed, his white brows
knitted together. “You cannot fill this channel with corpses, Arthas,” Sylvanas had gloated. “Not even
the whole city would be enough. You are stopped here, and your failure is sweet.” And then the being
who had once been human, who had once by all accounts been a good man, turned and grinned at her
blistering words of defiance, sending her into a paroxysm of agony and wrenching another soulsplitting scream from her incorporeal lips.
 He had found a solution.
 He cast Frostmourne toward the shore, watching it almost rapturously as it flipped end over end to
land with its tip impaled in the sand.
 “Frostmourne speaks….”
 Sylvanas heard it, too, the voice of the Lich King emanating from the unholy weapon as before her
shocked gaze the water lapping at its rune- inscribed blade began to turn to ice. Ice that his weapons,
and his warriors, could cross.
 He took her life, he took her beloved Quel’Thalas and Silvermoon, then he took her king before the
final violation.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 160
 They had resisted, on Quel’Danas, resisted with all they had in them. When Anasterian appeared
before Arthas, his fiery magics wreaked havoc on the death knight’s icy bridge, but Arthas recovered.
He frowned, his eyes flashing, drew Frostmourne, and bore down upon the elven king.
 Even as she hoped desperately that Anasterian would defeat Arthas, Sylvanas knew he would not.
Three millennia rested upon those shoulders; the white hue of hair that fell almost to his feet was due
to age, not dark magics. He had been a powerful fighter once, and was still a powerful mage, but to her
new, spectral sight, there was a frailty about him she had not seen when she breathed. Still, he stood,
his ancient weapon, Felo’melorn, “Flamestrike,” in one hand, a staff with a powerful, glittering crystal in
the other.
 Arthas struck, but Anasterian was no longer standing in front of the charging steed. Somehow,
faster than Sylvanas could see, he was kneeling, swinging Felo’melorn in a clean horizontal strike
across the horse’s forelegs, severing both of them. The horse shrieked and fell, its rider with it.
 “Invincible!” Arthas cried, seeming stricken as the undead horse rolled and tried to get to its feet
while missing its two forelegs. It seemed an odd battle cry to Sylvanas, considering Anasterian had just
gained an advantage. But the face Arthas turned toward the elven king was full of naked rage and pain.
He looked almost human now; a human male seeing something he loved in torment. He scrambled to
his feet, glancing back distractedly at the horse, and for a wild moment Sylvanas thought maybe, just
maybe—
 The ancient elven weapon was no match for the runeblade, as Sylvanas knew it would not, could
not be. It snapped as the blades clashed, the severed piece whirling away crazily as Anasterian fell, his
soul ripped from him and consumed by the glowing Frostmourne, as had been so many others.
 He sprawled on the ice, limp, blood pooling beneath him, white hair spread out like a shroud, while
Arthas rushed to the undead horse and mended its severed legs, patting the bones while it pranced and
nuzzled at him. And Sylvanas, although she knew it would harm those she still loved, could not carry
the weight of the pain and anguish and sheer burning hatred of Arthas and all he had done. Her head
fell back, her arms spreading as her mouth opened, and a cry, beautiful and terrible at once, was torn
from an insubstantial throat.
 She had cried out before, as he had tortured her. But that was only her own pain, her own despair.
This was so much more. Torment, agony, yes, but more than that, a hatred so profound as to be almost
pure. She heard other cries of pain mingling with hers, saw elves dropping to their knees clutching ears
that began to bleed. Their voices and their spells were stopped, changed from words of magic to
incoherent cries of raw grief and startled pain. Some of them fell, their armor shattering and breaking
off of them in jagged shards; their very bones breaking beneath their flesh.
 Even Arthas stared at her for a moment, his white brows drawn together in an appraising gesture.
She wanted to stop. She wanted to silence herself, muffle this cry of destruction that only served he
whom she hated so passionately. At last it wore down beneath her pain, and Sylvanas, banshee, fell
sickly silent.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 161
 “What a fine weapon you are indeed,” Arthas murmured. “And mayhap you will be a double- edged
sword. I will be watching you.”
 The horrible army pressed on. Arthas reached the plateau. He reached it, and slew those who
guarded the Sunwell, and forced her to participate in the slaughter. And then he visited the ultimate
horror upon her people, marching up to the glorious pool of radiance that had sustained the quel’dorei
for millennia. Beside it, waiting for him, stood a figure Sylvanas recognized—Dar’Khan Drathir.
 So it had been he who had betrayed Quel’Thalas. He who, even more than Arthas, had the blood of
thousands upon his well- manicured hands. Fury raged through her. She watched the glow she knew
to be golden play upon Arthas’s features, softening them and lending them an artificial warmth. Then
he upended the contents of an exquisitely crafted urn into the waters, and the radiance changed. It
began to pulse and swirl, and inside the swirling center of the damaged magical glow—
 —a shadow—
 Even after all she had witnessed this dark day, even after what she had become, Sylvanas was
stunned at what emerged from the befouled Sunwell, rising and lifting its arms to the skies. A skeleton,
horned and grinning, its eye sockets burning with fire. Chains snaked around it and purple vestments
fluttered with its movements.
 “I am reborn, as promised! The Lich King has granted me eternal life!”
 It had all been for this? To raise this single entity? All the slaughter, the torment, the terror; the
unspeakably precious and vital Sunwell corrupted, a way of life that had lasted for thousands of years
shattered—for this?
 She stared sickly at the cackling lich, and the only thing that gave her even a hint of surcease from
the agony was watching Dar’Khan, who had attempted to betray his master as he had betrayed his
people, dying, as she had done, from Frostmourne’s keen edge.
 World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 CHAPTER TWENTY
 The cold wind tousled Arthas’s white hair, caressed his face, and he smiled. It was good, to be again
in the colder part of this world. The elven land, with its eternal early summer, heavy with the scents of
blossoms and growth, had made him uneasy. It reminded him too much of the gardens of Dalaran,
where he had spent so much time with Jaina; of the snapdragons of the Balnir farm. Better the wind,
to scour him clean, and the coldness, to quell those memories. They no longer served him, but
weakened him, and there was no room for weakness in the heart of Arthas Menethil.
 He was, as ever, atop his loyal horse, Invincible. He had had a bad moment in Quel’Thalas, when
that bastard king Anasterian had cowardly attacked an innocent steed rather than its rider, severing its
legs in the same way that in life had caused Invincible’s death. The incident had catapulted Arthas back
in time to those horrible moments, shaking him to the core and in the case of the battle with
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 162
Anasterian, unleashing an icy rage that in the end had served him well. Before and behind him, his
army marched through the snowy pass, untiring, unaffected by the cold. Somewhere in among their
ghastly number floated a banshee. Arthas would let Sylvanas be, for the moment. He was more
interested in Kel’Thuzad, who glided beside him almost serenely, if such a word could ever be applied
to a lich. He was the one who had directed the Scourge to this remote, frozen place, and Arthas had
until now not questioned. But the trek was getting boring, and he was curious. The prince felt a smile
curve his lips.
 “So,” he quipped, “you’re not upset about me killing you that one time?”
 “Don’t be foolish,” the undead necromancer replied. “The Lich King told me how our encounter
would end.”
 That surprised Arthas. “The Lich King knew that I would kill you?” He frowned, glancing down at
the blade that stretched across his lap. It was silent now, dormant. No whispers came from it, nor did
the runes pulse with power.
 “Of course,” Kel’Thuzad responded, a hint of superiority in his sepulchral voice. “He chose you to be
his champion long before the Scourge even began.”
 Arthas’s unease deepened. No one had asked him, or even told him about his destiny. But would he
have embraced it, had he known? No, he decided. He did not like being manipulated, but he knew that
he had had to be tempered if he was to be a formidable weapon. He had to go step by step to his fate,
otherwise he would have rejected it. He would then still be with Jaina and Uther and his father would
—
 “If he’s so all knowing, then how can the dreadlords control him like they do?”
 “They are agents of the one who created our master: the fiery lords of the Burning Legion.”
 The words sent a shiver through Arthas. Burning Legion. Two words only, but the power they
promised was heady, somehow. In his lap, Frostmourne flickered.
 “It is a vast demonic army that has consumed countless worlds beyond our own.” Kel’Thuzad’s voice
was almost hypnotic, and Arthas shut his eyes for a moment. Behind the closed lids, scenes played out
in his mind as the lich spoke. He saw a red sky arcing over a red world. Over a ridge poured a wave of
creatures. They ran like hounds, but no natural beasts were they—they had fearsome jaws crammed
with teeth, and strange tentacles sprouting from their shoulders. Stones crashed to the earth, leaving
trails of green fire, to come to life as animated rock that marched on their foes.
 “Now, it comes to set this world to the flame. Our master was created to pave the way for its arrival.
The dreadlords were sent to make sure he succeeded.”
 The scene in Arthas’s mind shifted. He was looking at an ornate carved gateway. He knew it to be
the Dark Portal, although he had never seen it with his own eyes. It radiated green fire, and a host of
demons were clustered around it. Arthas shook his head and the vision evaporated.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 163
 “So the plague in Lordaeron, the citadels in Northrend, the slaughtering of the elves…it was all just
to prepare for some huge demonic invasion?”
 “Yes. In time, you will find that our entire history has been shaped by the coming conflict.”
 Arthas pondered this. Frostmourne was definitely awakening, and he removed the gauntlet from
his right hand to caress it. Cold, bone cold it was, so cold that even his death knight’s hand, which had
been tempered for such a task, ached as he touched it. He felt the whispers again, and smiled.
 “There is more, lich, is there not?” he asked, turning to regard Kel’Thuzad. “You have said that the
dreadlords imprison our master. Tell me now.”
 Not possessing flesh any longer, Kel’Thuzad had no facial expressions with which to betray his
emotions. But Arthas knew by the slight hunching of the undead’s form that he was uncomfortable.
Nonetheless, he spoke.
 “The first phase of the Lich King’s plan was to engineer the Scourge, which would eradicate any
group that might resist the Legion’s arrival.”
 Arthas nodded. “Like the forces of Lordaeron…and the high elves.” He felt a vague knot in the pit of
his stomach, but dismissed it.
 “Exactly. The second phase is to actually summon the demon lord who will spark the invasion.” The
lich lifted a bony finger and pointed in the direction in which they traveled. “There is a nearby
encampment of orcs who maintain a functional demon gate. I must use the gate to commune with the
demon lord and receive his instructions.”
 Arthas sat quietly atop Invincible for a moment. His mind went back to when he had fought orcs
alongside Uther the Lightbringer at Strahnbrad. He recalled the orcs had performed human sacrifices
to their demon lords. He and Uther had both been disgusted and appalled. Arthas himself had been so
infuriated that Uther had had to lecture him on not fighting with rage in his heart. “If we allow our
passions to turn to bloodlust, then we will become as vile as the orcs,” Uther had chided.
 Well, Uther was dead, and while Arthas was still killing orcs, he was now working with demons. A
muscle twitched near his eye.
 “What are we waiting for?” he snapped, and urged Invincible into a gallop.

 The orcs fought bravely, but in the end, it was futile, as all attempts to halt the Scourge would be
futile. Arthas galloped forward, Invincible leaping nimbly over fallen orc bodies. He regarded the gate
for a long moment. Three stone slabs, strangely elegant for so brutal a race. Erected nearby, though,
were huge animal bones that glowed a dull red hue. In the confines outlined by the slabs of stone,
green energy swirled sluggishly. A passage to another world. Jaina would be intrigued—but too
horrified to pursue her curiosity. That was what made her weak.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 164
 It…was what made her Jaina….
 “The brutes have been slain,” Arthas spat. “The demon gate is yours, lich.”
 The skeletal form shivered with delight, floating forward and lifting his arms imploringly. Steps led
up to the archway; Arthas noticed that the lich did not ascend any of them. He stood at the bottom,
out of respect—or out of a more pragmatic desire to avoid harm. Arthas hung back, watching intently
from atop Invincible.
 “I call upon thee, Archimonde! Your humble servant seeks an audience!”
 The green mist continued to swirl. Then, Arthas realized he could make out a shape—features—
that were both like and unlike the dreadlords he was more familiar with.
 The being had what Arthas guessed to be blue- gray skin, though with the green light tingeing him,
it was difficult to be certain. There was no question, however, that the demon’s body was powerful,
with a mighty barrel chest, large, strong arms, and a lower body that seemed to be shaped like that of a
goat—Archimonde’s legs curved back, ending in a pair of cloven hooves instead of feet. A tail twitched,
perhaps belying Archimonde’s calm, in- control demeanor. Arms, shoulders, and legs were encased in
golden, gleaming armor adorned with shapes of skulls and spikes. Twin tentacles, long and thin,
dangled from his chin. But the most arresting feature of his elongated face were his eyes, which glowed
a sickly green color that was brighter and more compelling than the green mist that whirled about him.
Even though Archimonde was not yet here, not yet physically in this world, Arthas was not unmoved
by the demon’s presence.
 “You called my name, puny lich, and I have come,” said the demon, his voice resonant and seeming
to vibrate along Arthas’s very bones. “You are Kel’Thuzad, are you not?”
 Kel’Thuzad bowed his horned head. He was all but groveling, Arthas noted. “Yes, great one. I am
the summoner. I beg of you, tell me how I may expedite your passage into this world. I exist only to
serve.”
 “There is a special tome you must find,” the demon lord intoned. His gaze flickered to Arthas,
examined him for a moment, then dismissed him. Arthas found himself growing annoyed. “The only
remaining spellbook of Medivh, the Last Guardian. Only his lost incantations are powerful enough to
bring me into your world. Seek out the mortal city of Dalaran. It is there that the tome is kept. At
twilight, three days from now, you will begin the summoning.”
 The image disappeared. Arthas stared at where it had been for a long moment.
 Dalaran. The greatest concentration of magic, other than Quel’Thalas, in Azeroth.
 Dalaran. Where Jaina Proudmoore had trained. Where Jaina still would probably be. A flicker of
pain blinked through him for an instant.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 165
 “Dalaran is defended by the most powerful magi in Azeroth,” he said slowly to Kel’Thuzad. “There
is no way to hide our approach. They will be prepared for us.”
 “As Quel’Thalas was?” Kel’Thuzad laughed, a hollow sound. “Think how easily this army crushed
them. They will do the same there. Besides, remember—I was a member of the Kirin Tor, and close to
Archmage Antonidas. Dalaran was my home, when I was nothing more than mortal flesh. I know its
secrets, its protective spells, ways to slip inside they never thought to properly guard. It is sweet, to be
able to visit terror upon those who would have seen me abandon my path and my destiny. Do not fear,
death knight. We cannot fail. No one, no thing, can stop the Scourge.”
 Out of the corner of his eye, Arthas caught movement. He turned and beheld the floating spirit that
had once been Sylvanas Windrunner. She had obviously been listening to the entire conversation and
seen his reaction to his new orders.
 “This talk of Dalaran moves you,” she said archly.
 “Silence, ghost,” he muttered, despite himself remembering the first time he had entered the gates of
Dalaran as escort to Jaina. The innocence of that time was almost impossible for him to conceive of
anymore.
 “Someone there you care for, perhaps? Pleasant memories?”
 The damned banshee would not let up. He surrendered to his anger, lifted a hand, and she writhed
in pain for a moment before he released her.
 “You will say no more of this,” he warned. “Let us be about our task.”
 Sylvanas was silent. But on her pale, ghostly face was a savage smirk of satisfaction.

 “I can help.” Jaina’s voice was calm, calmer than she actually expected it to sound. She stood with
her master, Antonidas, in his familiar, loved, wonderfully disorganized study, gazing at him intently.
“I’ve learned so much.”
 The archmage stood gazing out the window, his hands clasped loosely behind his back, as if he
were doing nothing more serious than looking down at students at practice.
 “No,” he said quietly. “You have other duties.” He turned to regard her then, and her heart sank at
the expression on his face. “Duties I…and Terenas, Light rest his soul…both shirked. Because of his
refusal to listen to that strange prophet, he ended up murdered by his son, and his kingdom lies in
ruins, inhabited only by the dead.”
 Even now, Jaina cringed at the statement. Arthas…
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 166
 It was still so hard to believe. She had loved him so much…loved him still. Her constant prayer,
silent and known only to her, was that he was under some sort of influence he could not resist. Because
if he had done all this of his own will—
 “I, too, was asked, and I, too, had the arrogance to assume I knew best. And so, my dear, here we
are. We all must live—or die—with our decisions.” Antonidas smiled sadly. Her eyes stung with tears
she blinked back and refused to shed.
 “Let me stay. I can—”
 “Keep safe those you have promised to take care of, Jaina Proudmoore,” Antonidas said, a hint of
sternness creeping into his voice and mien. “One more or one less here…will make no difference.
Others look to you now.”
 “Antonidas…” Her voice broke on the word. She rushed toward him, flinging her arms around him.
She had never dared embrace him before; he had always intimidated her far too much. But now, he
looked…old. Old, and frail, and worst of all, resigned.
 “Child,” he said affectionately, patting her back, then chuckled. “No, you are a child no longer. You
are a woman and a leader. Still…you had best go.”
 From outside a voice rang out, strong and clear and familiar. Jaina felt as though she had been
struck. She gasped in sickened recognition, pulling back from her mentor’s embrace.
 “Wizards of the Kirin Tor! I am Arthas, first of the Lich King’s death knights! I demand that you
open your gates and surrender to the might of the Scourge!”
 Death knight? Jaina turned her shocked gaze to Antonidas, who gave her a sad smile. “I would have
spared you the knowing…at least for now.”
 She reeled with the knowledge. Arthas…here…
 The archmage strode to the balcony. A slight flutter of age- gnarled hands, and his own voice was as
magnified as Arthas’s had been.
 “Greetings, Prince Arthas,” Antonidas called down. “How fares your noble father?”
 “Lord Antonidas,” Arthas replied. Where was he? Right outside? Would she see him if she stepped
beside Antonidas on the balcony? “There’s no need to be snide.” Jaina turned her head away and wiped
at her eyes. She struggled to speak, but the words seemed to stick in her throat.
 “We’ve prepared for your coming, Arthas,” Antonidas continued calmly. “My brethren and I have
erected auras that will destroy any undead that pass through them.”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 167
 “Your petty magics will not stop me, Antonidas. Perhaps you’ve heard what happened in
Quel’Thalas? They thought themselves invulnerable as well.”
 Quel’Thalas.
 Jaina thought she might be sick. She had been here in Dalaran when word had come, from a
handful of survivors who had managed to escape, about what had happened to Quel’Thalas. So too
had been the quel’dorei prince. She had never seen Kael’thas so—so angry, so shattered, so raw. She
had gone to him, words of compassion and comfort on her lips, but he whirled and gazed at her with
such a look of fury that she instinctively drew back.
 “Say nothing,” Kael had snarled. His fists clenched; she could see, to her shock, that he was barely
restraining himself from physically harming her. “Foolish girl. This is the monster you would take to
your bed?”
 Jaina blinked, stunned at the crudeness of the words coming from one so cultured. “I—”
 But he was not interested in hearing anything she had to say. “Arthas is a butcher! He has
slaughtered thousands of innocent people! There is so much blood on his hands that a whole ocean
could never wash them clean. And you loved him? Chose him over me?”
 His voice, normally so mellifluous and controlled, cracked on the last word. Jaina felt quick tears
come to her eyes as she suddenly understood. He was attacking her because he could not attack his
real enemy. He felt helpless, impotent, and was striking out at the nearest target—at her, Jaina
Proudmoore, whose love he had wanted and failed to win.
 “Oh…Kael’thas,” she said softly, “he has done…terrible things,” she began. “What your people have
suffered—”
 “You know nothing of suffering!” he cried. “You are a child, with a child’s mind and a child’s heart. A
heart that you would give to that—that—he slaughtered them, Jaina. And then he raised their corpses!”
 Jaina stared at him mutely, his words having no sting now that she knew the reason for them. “He
murdered my father, Jaina, just as he murdered his own. I—I should have been there.”
 “To die with him? With the rest of your people? What good would throwing your life away do for—”
 No sooner had the words left her lips than she realized that it was the wrong thing to say. Kael’thas
tensed and cut her off sharply.
 “I could have stopped him. I should have.” He straightened, and coldness suddenly chased away the
fire in him. He bowed low, exaggeratedly. “I will be departing Dalaran as soon as possible. There is
nothing for me here.” Jaina winced at the emptiness, the resignation in his voice. “I was a fool of the
greatest order to ever think any of you humans could aid me. I will leave this place of doddering old
magi and ambitious young ones. None of you can help. My people need me to lead now that my father
—”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 168
 He fell silent and swallowed hard. “I must go to them. To what pathetically few remain. To those
who have endured, rebirthed by the blood of those who now serve your beloved.”
 He had stalked off then, fury etched in every line of his tall, elegant body, and Jaina had felt her own
heart ache with his pain.
 And now, he was here; Arthas was here, at the head of the army of the undead, a death knight
himself. Antonidas’s voice startled her out of her reverie and she blinked, trying to return to the present
moment.
 “Pull your troops back, or we will be forced to unleash our full powers against you! Make your
choice, death knight.” Antonidas stepped back from the balcony and turned to regard Jaina. “Jaina,” he
said in his normal voice, “we will be erecting teleportation- blocking barriers momentarily. You must go
before you are trapped here.”
 “Maybe I can reason with him…maybe I can…” She fell silent, hearing the unrealistic wanting in her
own voice. She hadn’t even been able to stop him from murdering innocents in Stratholme, or going to
Northrend when she was certain it was a trap. He’d not listened to her then. If Arthas was indeed
under some dark influence, how could she dissuade him now?
 She took a deep breath and stepped back, and Antonidas nodded softly. There was so much she
wanted to say to this man, her mentor, her guide. But all she could do was give him a shaky smile, now,
as he fought what they both knew would likely be his last battle. She found she couldn’t even say goodbye to him.
 “I’ll take care of our people,” she said thickly, cast the teleportation spell, and disappeared.

 The first part of the battle was over, and Arthas had gotten what he had come for. Arthas had
obtained the requested spellbook of Medivh. It was large and curiously heavy for its size, bound in red
leather with gold binding. Across its front was an exquisitely tooled black raven, its wings outspread.
The book still had Antonidas’s blood on it. He wondered if that would make it more potent.
 Invincible shifted beneath him, stamping a hoof and shaking his neck as if he still had flesh that
could be irritated by flies. They were on a hilltop overlooking Dalaran, whose towers still caught the
light and gleamed in hues of gold and white and purple while its streets ran with blood. Many of the
magi who had fought him hours before stood beside him now. Most of them were too badly damaged
to be of use other than as fodder to throw at attackers, but some…some could still be used, the skills
they had in life harnessed to serve the Lich King in death.
 Kel’Thuzad was like a child on Winter Veil morning. He was perusing the pages of Medivh’s
spellbook, thoroughly engrossed with this new toy. It irritated Arthas.
 “The circle of power has been prepared per your instructions, lich. Are you ready to begin the
summoning?”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 169
 “Nearly,” the undead thing replied. Skeletal fingers turned a page of the book. “There is much to
absorb. Medivh’s knowledge of demons alone is staggering. I suspect that he was far more powerful
than anyone ever realized.”
 A blackish- green swirl had begun manifesting as Kel’Thuzad spoke, and Tichondrius appeared as
he finished. Arthas’s irritation deepened as the dreadlord spoke with his usual arrogance. “Not
powerful enough to escape death, that is for certain. Suffice to say, the work he began, we will finish…
today. Let the summoning commence!”
 And that quickly, he was gone. Kel’Thuzad floated into the circle. The space was marked out by
four small obelisks. In their center, a glowing circle with arcane markings had been etched. Kel’Thuzad
bore the book with him, and once he fluttered into position, the lines of the circle flared to glowing
purple life. At the same moment, there was a spitting, crackling sound and eight pillars of flame sprang
up about him. Kel’Thuzad turned to gaze back at Arthas with glowing eyes.
 “Those who yet live within Dalaran will be able to sense the power of this spell,” Kel’Thuzad
warned. “I must not be interrupted or we will fail.”
 “I’ll keep your bones safe, lich,” Arthas assured him.
 As Kel’Thuzad had promised, it had been comparatively easy to enter Dalaran, slay those who had
erected specific spells against them, and take what they had come for. Arthas had even been able to kill
Archmage Antonidas, the man he had once thought so very powerful.
 If Jaina had been there, he felt certain that she would have confronted him. Appealed to what they
had once had, as she had done before. She would have had no better luck now than she had then,
except—
 He was glad he did not have to fight her.
 Arthas’s attention suddenly snapped back to the present. The gates were opening, and Arthas’s gray
lips curved in a grin. Previously, the Scourge had had the element of surprise on their side. Yes, many
powerful magi lived in Dalaran at all times. But there was no trained militia, nor were all the magi of
the Kirin Tor in Dalaran. But they had had several hours, and they had not been idle.
 They had teleported in an army.
 Good. A solid fight was just what he needed to drive distracting thoughts of Jaina Proudmoore and
the youth he had once been to the back of his mind.
 He lifted Frostmourne, feeling it tingle in his hand, hearing the soft voice of the Lich King caress
his thoughts.
 “Frostmourne hungers,” he told his troops, pointing the sword at the armor- clad defenders of the
great mage city. “Let us sate its appetite.”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 170
 The Scourge army roared, Sylvanas’s anguished wail rising above the cacophony, causing Arthas to
grin even more. Even in death, even though she obeyed his commands, she defied him, and he relished
forcing her to attack those she would have preferred to defend. Invincible gathered himself beneath his
rider and surged forward at a full gallop, whinnying.
 Some of his ghastly troops stayed behind to defend Kel’Thuzad, but most of them accompanied
their leader. Arthas recognized the livery of many of those whom the Kirin Tor had teleported in to
defend the city. Friends they had once been, but that was all in the past, as irrelevant to him as
yesterday’s weather. It was getting easier now, to feel nothing but satisfaction as Frostmourne,
glowing and all but singing as it feasted upon souls, rose and fell, cutting through plate as easily as
flesh.
 After the first wave of soldiers fell, raised to serve in the Scourge or abandoned where they had
fallen as of no use, a second one came. This one had magi with them, clad in the purple robes of
Dalaran with an embroidered symbol of the great Eye upon them. But Arthas, too, had additional aid.
 The demons, it would seem, wished to protect their own.
 Giant stones screamed down from the sky, their tails streaks of fel green fire. The earth shook where
they struck, and from the craters caused by their impact climbed what looked like stone golems, held
together and directed by the sickly green energy.
 Arthas glanced over his shoulder. Kel’Thuzad hovered, his arms spread, his horned head thrown
back. Energy crackled and coursed from him, and a green orb began to form. Then, abruptly, the lich
lowered his arms and stepped out of the circle.
 “Come forth, Lord Archimonde!” Kel’Thuzad cried. “Enter this world and let us bask in your
power!”
 The green orb pulsed, expanding, growing taller and glowing yet more brightly. Suddenly a pillar
of fire shot skyward, and several answering lightning bolts crackled down outside the circle. And then,
where there had been nothing, a figure stood—tall, powerful, graceful in its own dark and dangerous
way. Arthas returned his attention to the battlefield. A retreat sounded—clearly the magi, at least, had
seen what was transpiring, and their troops wheeled their mounts and galloped back toward the safety
—temporary though Arthas suspected it to be—of Dalaran. Even as they fled, a deep, resonant voice
cut through the sound of battle.
 “Tremble, mortals, and despair! Doom has come to this world!”
 Arthas held up his hand, and with that simplest of gestures the swarm of Scourge halted and
retreated as well. As he galloped back to Kel’Thuzad, eyeing the giant demon lord all the while,
Tichondrius teleported in. As usual, after all the danger had passed.
 The dreadlord made a deep obeisance. Arthas drew rein some distance away, preferring to observe.
 “Lord Archimonde, all the preparations have been made.”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 171
 “Very well, Tichondrius,” replied Archimonde, giving the lesser demon a dismissive nod. “Since the
Lich King is of no further use to me, you dreadlords will now command the Scourge.”
 Arthas was suddenly very grateful for all those hours spent in disciplined meditation. It was only
that that kept his shock and fury from showing. Even so, Invincible felt the change in him and pranced
nervously. He yanked on the reins and the undead beast stilled. The Lich King was of no further use?
Why? Who exactly was he, and what had happened to him? What would happen to Arthas?
 “Soon, I will order the invasion to begin. But first, I will make an example of these paltry wizards…
by crushing their city into the ashes of history.”
 He strode off, his body erect and proud and commanding, his hooves landing firmly with each step,
his armor gleaming in the rose and gold and lavender of the encroaching twilight. Beside him, still
making obeisance, strode Tichondrius. Arthas waited until they were some distance away before he
finally whirled on Kel’Thuzad and burst out, “This has got to be a joke! What happens to us now?”
 “Be patient, young death knight. The Lich King foresaw this as well. You may yet have a part to
play in his grand design.”
 May? Arthas whirled on the necromancer, his nostrils flaring, but he tamped back his anger. If
anyone—either of the demons or the Lich King himself—thought for one moment that Arthas was a
tool to simply be used and then discarded, he would soon show them the error of their thinking. He
had done too much—lost too much, cut out too much of himself for this to be cast aside.
 It couldn’t all be for nothing.
 It would not all be for nothing.
 The earth rumbled. Invincible shifted uneasily, lifting his hooves as if to minimize contact with the
earth. Arthas glanced up quickly at the mage city. The towers were lovely at this time of day, proud and
glorious and glittering in the deepening twilight hues. But as he watched, he heard a deep cracking
noise. The apex of the tallest, most beautiful tower in the city suddenly fell, slowly and inexorably,
tumbling downward as if the length of the tower had been clenched by a giant, unseen hand.
 The rest of the city fell quickly, shattering and crumbling, the sound of destruction loud and
thrumming in Arthas’s ears. He winced at the volume, but did not tear his eyes away.
 He had instigated the fall of Silvermoon. Had directed his Scourge against it. But this—there was
casualness about it, an ease…Silvermoon had been a hard- won prize. Archimonde appeared to be able
to shatter the greatest of human cities without even being present.
 Arthas thought about Archimonde and Tichondrius. He scratched his chin thoughtfully.
 In his lap, Frostmourne glowed.
 World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 172
 CHAPTER TWENTY- ONE
 Kel’Thuzad, Arthas mused as he waited atop the verdant hill for the one he had been assured would
come, was a useful lich to have around.
 He was utterly loyal to the Lich King, even to the point of convincingly playing the lapdog to
Archimonde and Tichondrius while in their presence, if that was what was required to secretly serve.
Arthas had opted for silence; he did not trust himself to lie as convincingly as Kel’Thuzad. The two
demons had deemed them nonessential. They would soon see how wrong they were. Carelessly they
had left the Book of Medivh in the lich’s bony hands. In that mind, too, were spells and magic so
powerful that Arthas knew he would never be able to fully grasp their scope.
 “The third part of the plan,” Kel’Thuzad had said once the demons were gone, as idly as if he were
conversing about the weather, “was the true heart of the Legion’s plot.”
 Arthas remembered what Kel’Thuzad had told him earlier. First had been the creation of the
Scourge, then the summoning of Archimonde. He listened now with intense interest as Kel’Thuzad
continued. “The Legion is after nothing less than the taking of all magic and the devouring of all life
upon this world. And to that end, they plan to consume the concentrated, powerful energies contained
within the elves’ Well of Eternity. In order to accomplish this, they must destroy the single thing that
contains within it the truest, purest essence of life energy on Azeroth. The Well of Eternity lies across
the ocean, on the continent of Kalimdor. And the thing that would thwart the Legion is called
Nordrassil…the World Tree. It grants the kaldorei immortality, and they are bound to it.”
 “Kaldorei?” Arthas was confused. “I know of quel’dorei. Are they another race of elves?”
 “The original race,” Kel’Thuzad corrected. He waved a hand dismissively. “But those details are of
no consequence. What matters is that we must stop the Legion from achieving this goal. And there is
one among the kaldorei who would aid us.”
 And so it was that using his magics, Kel’Thuzad had teleported Arthas to this distant continent and
this hill that afforded an expansive view. The forests here were lush, healthy, but Arthas could already
see what the Legion had wrought in the distance. Where the land, trees, beasts were not dead, they
had been corrupted. Devour all life, indeed.
 A figure crested another hill below him, and Arthas smiled to himself. This was the one whose
arrival he had been awaiting.
 They were certainly different, these “night elves.” This one’s skin was pale lavender, etched with
swirling tattoos and scars cut into the skin in ritualistic patterns. A black cloth was tied around his
eyes, but he appeared to have no difficulty in navigating the terrain. He carried a weapon that
resembled nothing Arthas had ever seen. Instead of a traditional sword, which would be grasped by a
hilt with a blade extending from it, this weapon had two jagged blades that glowed the sick green hue
of something tainted with demonic energies.
 So, this one had trafficked with demons before.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 173
 Arthas waited a while, observing. The night elf—Illidan Stormrage, Kel’Thuzad had said his name
was—raged to himself. Apparently the list of wrongs piled against him was a lengthy one, and he ached
for vengeance and power as much as Kel’Thuzad had said he would.
 Arthas smiled.
 “I am free after ten thousand years, yet still my own brother thinks I am a villain!” Illidan ranted. “I’ll
show him my true power. I’ll show him the demons have no hold over me!”
 “Are you certain of that, demon hunter?” Arthas said, his voice carrying. The night elf whirled,
brandishing his weapon. “Are you certain your will is your own?”
 The elf might have been blind in the traditional sense, but Arthas felt seen regardless. Illidan sniffed
and growled. “You reek of death, human. You’ll regret approaching me.”
 Arthas grinned. He was itching for a good one- on- one fight. “Come then,” he invited. “You’ll find
that we’re evenly matched.” Invincible reared and galloped down the hill, as eager for action as his
master was. Illidan growled and ran to meet him.
 It was almost like a dance, Arthas mused as the two warriors faced each other. Illidan was strong
and graceful, his skills demonically enhanced. But Arthas, too, was no mere soldier, nor was
Frostmourne an ordinary blade. The fight was fierce and swift; Arthas had been right. They were
indeed evenly matched. After too short a time, both combatants fell back, breathing heavily.
 “We could go on fighting like this forever,” Illidan said. “What is it you truly want?”
 Arthas lowered Frostmourne. “From your muttering earlier, I hear that you and your allies are beset
by the undead. The dreadlord who commands this undead army is called Tichondrius. He controls a
powerful warlock artifact called the Skull of Gul’dan. It is responsible for corrupting these forests.”
 Illidan cocked his head. “And you wish for me to steal it? Why?”
 Arthas’s white brows lifted. This one was indeed quick. He deserved a semi- truthful answer,
Arthas decided. “Let’s just say that I have no love for Tichondrius, and the lord I serve would…benefit
from the Legion’s downfall.”
 “Why should I believe anything you say, little human?”
 Arthas shrugged. “A fair question. Let me answer. My master sees all, demon hunter. He knows
that you’ve sought power your whole life. Now it lies within your grasp!” His gauntleted hand clenched
into a fist in front of Illidan’s blindfolded face and, as he expected, the night elf’s head turned toward
the gesture. “Seize it, and your enemies will be undone.”
 Illidan lifted his head slowly and turned his face to Arthas. He was unsettling, this blind man who
could so obviously see. The elf stepped back, nodding thoughtfully. Without another word Arthas
turned Invincible’s head around and galloped off.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 174
 Kel’Thuzad would summon him back shortly. All had gone according to the Lich King’s plan. He
only hoped that Illidan had been as fully obedient as he had seemed. If not…there could be
complications.

 She was nothing of the living. Nor did she have the power to resist the commands of the one who
had brought her screaming into this new existence.
 But Sylvanas Windrunner had will. Somehow, Arthas had not broken that. He had done so with
others; why was she, seemingly, the only one who had not caved utterly to him? Was it her own
strength, or was it because he enjoyed tormenting her? The banshee that she was now would likely
never know. But if her will was her own because Arthas found it amusing, she would have the last
laugh.
 So she had vowed to herself, and Sylvanas always kept her promises.
 Time had passed in the world of the living since Arthas Menethil and the Scourge had swept
through her beloved homeland. And much had occurred.
 Her so- called “master” had objected to being used as a pawn. Together with that arrogant, floating
sack of bones, Kel’Thuzad—the one responsible for corrupting the glorious Sunwell—Arthas had
conspired against both the dreadlord Tichondrius and the demon lord Archimonde, whom
Kel’Thuzad himself had helped usher into Azeroth. Sylvanas had paid keen attention; anything Arthas
had to reveal about the way he thought and the way he battled was useful to her.
 He had not attempted to slay Tichondrius himself, as he had Mal’Ganis. Oh no, the wily oncehuman prince had tricked another into doing his dirty work for him. Illidan, the luckless being had
been named. Arthas had been able to smell Illidan’s hunger for power and used that against him,
goading him into stealing the Skull of Gul’dan, a legendary orcish warlock. To do so, Illidan would
have to kill Tichondrius. Arthas would be rid of the demon lord, and Illidan would be rewarded with
an artifact to sate his lust for power. Presumably all had gone according to plan. Arthas—and therefore
Sylvanas—had heard nothing of Illidan since.
 As for Archimonde…so mighty that he had been able to destroy Dalaran, the great mage city, with a
single spell, he had fallen to the power of the life he had come here to consume. Sylvanas now hated the
living with the same passion the Legion had had, and thus it was with mixed feelings that she learned
of his fall. The night elves had sacrificed their immortality to defeat him. The pure, focused power of
nature had destroyed the demon from inside, and then the World Tree had surrendered its vast power
in a cataclysm that sent out a massive shock wave. And when Archimonde had fallen, his skeleton all
that was left, so too had the Legion’s attempt to gain a foothold in this world been defeated.
 Sylvanas returned her attention from her reverie to the present, as the name of the late unlamented
demon lord caught her ear.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 175
 “It’s been months since we last heard from Lord Archimonde,” their leader, Detheroc, said. He
stamped his hoof impatiently. “I grow tired of watching over these rotting undead! What are we still
doing here?”
 They were in what had once been the gardens of the palace, where Arthas had strode so long and so
short a time ago to murder his own father and unleash doom on his own people. The gardens, too,
were rotting as well as their populace.
 “We were charged with overseeing this land, Detheroc,” chided the one named Balnazzar. “It is our
duty to remain here and ensure that the Scourge is ready for action.”
 “True,” rumbled the third, Varimathras. “Although we should have received some kind of orders by
now.”
 Sylvanas could hardly believe what she had just heard. She turned to Kel’Thuzad. She despised him
as much as she despised the death knight he appeared to serve so willingly, but she hid her dislike well.
“The Legion was defeated months ago,” she said quietly. “How could they not know?”
 “Impossible to say,” the lich replied. “But the longer they remain in command, the more they run the
Scourge into the ground. If something is not—”
 He was interrupted by a sound Sylvanas had never expected to hear in this place—the distinctive
sound of a gate being battered and broken. Both undead turned at the noise, and the demons growled
angrily, instantly alert, black webbed wings flexing.
 Sylvanas’s glowing, spectral eyes widened slightly as none other than Arthas himself emerged
through the gate. His familiar undead steed all but pranced beneath him. He wore no helm, letting his
white hair fall freely about his pale face, and he wore that self- satisfied smirk that Sylvanas so despised.
Her insubstantial hands attempted to clench into fists, but such was his control over her that all her
fingers could manage was a brief twitch.
 Arthas’s voice was resonant and cheerful. “Greetings, dreadlords,” he said. They stared at him,
visibly bridling at his insolence. “I should thank you for looking after my kingdom during my absence.
However, I won’t be requiring your services any longer.”
 For a second, they simply gaped at him. Finally, Balnazzar recovered enough to retort, “This land is
ours. The Scourge belongs to the Legion!”
 Ah, thought Sylvanas, here it comes.
 Arthas’s smirk widened. His voice was positively gleeful. “Not anymore, demon. Your masters have
been defeated. The Legion is undone. Your deaths will complete the circle.”
 Still grinning, he lifted Frostmourne. The runes along its blade danced and glowed. He tightened
the reins and the skeletal horse bore down on the cluster of three demons.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 176
 “This isn’t over, human!” Detheroc cried defiantly. The dreadlords were faster than Arthas’s skeletal
horse—Frostmourne sang only of frustration as it sliced through empty air. The demons had created a
portal and vanished to safety. Arthas scowled, but his good humor returned quickly. Sylvanas realized
it was because he had them on the run and their deaths would likely be only a matter of time.
 He looked up and caught Sylvanas’s eye, beckoning her to him. She was forced to obey. Kel’Thuzad
needed no coercion, floating happily to his master’s side like an obedient cur.
 “We knew you would return to us, Prince Arthas!” the lich enthused.
 Arthas barely spared his loyal servant a glance. His gaze was fixed on Sylvanas. “My heart is moved,”
he said sarcastically. “Did you, too, know I would return, little banshee?”
 “I did,” Sylvanas said coldly. It was true; he had to, or else she would never have her chance for
revenge. He twitched a finger, demanding more from her, and she gasped as pain shuddered through
her. “Prince Arthas,” she added.
 “Ah, but you will now address me as king. This is, after all, my land. I was born to rule and I shall.
Once the—”
 He broke off, inhaling sharply. His eyes widened and then his face contorted in pain. He hunched
over the bony neck of his horse, his gauntleted hands clenching hard on the reins. A sharp cry of agony
was wrenched from him.
 Sylvanas watched, experiencing the most pleasure she had known since that dreadful day when
Quel’Thalas had fallen. She drank in his pain like nectar. She had no idea why he was suffering so, but
she savored every second of it.
 Grunting, he lifted his head. His eyes stared at something she couldn’t see, and he extended an
imploring hand toward it. “The pain…is unbearable,” Arthas growled through gritted teeth. “What is
happening to me?” He appeared to listen, as if an unheard voice was replying.
 “King Arthas!” Kel’Thuzad cried. “Do you need assistance?”
 Arthas didn’t reply at once. He gasped for breath, then slowly sat up, visibly composing himself.
“No…no, the pain has passed but…my powers…are diminished.” His voice was full of puzzlement. Had
Sylvanas still possessed a beating heart, it would have leaped at the words. “Something is terribly
wrong here. I—”
 The pain took him again. His body spasmed, his head falling back as his mouth opened in a
soundless cry of pain, the veins on his neck standing out like cords. Kel’Thuzad fluttered around his
adored master like a fussy nursemaid. Sylvanas simply watched coldly until the spasm had passed.
Slowly, carefully, he slid off Invincible. His booted feet hit the flagstones, slipped out from under him
and he fell, hard. The lich reached out a skeletal hand to help the prince—no, self- styled king—to his
feet.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 177
 “My old quarters,” gasped Arthas. “I need rest—and then I have a long journey to prepare for.”
 Sylvanas watched him go, staggering weakly in the direction of the rooms he had grown up in. She
let her lips curve into a smile….
 …and the spectral fingers on her hands twitched for a moment, then curled up into angry fists.

 It was oddly peaceful in Silverpine. Soft mists swirled gently near the moist, pine- needle- covered
earth. Sylvanas knew that if she had possessed physical feet, she would have felt it soft and springy
beneath them; would have inhaled a rich evergreen scent from the moist air. But she felt nothing,
smelled nothing. She floated, insubstantial, toward the meeting site. And such was her eagerness for
the meeting that at this moment she did not regret her lack of senses.
 Arthas had enjoyed turning beautiful, proud, strong- willed quel’dorei women into banshees, after
his “success” with her. He had given them to she who had been their ranger- general in life, to control
and command, tossing her a bone like she was a faithful hound. He would shortly see how faithful a pet
she was. After overhearing the dreadlords’ conversation earlier, she had sent one of her banshees after
them to speak with them and gather information.
 The demons had accepted her emissary with pleasure, and had asked for her mistress to join them
tonight to discuss something of “mutual benefit regarding the Banshee Queen’s current status.”
 In the depths of the forest, she could see a faint green glow, and floated toward it. Sure enough,
they awaited her as they had said they would—three great demons turning to her, their wings flapping
and betraying their agitation.
 Balnazzar spoke first. “Lady Sylvanas, we are pleased that you came.”
 “How could I not?” she responded. “For some reason I no longer hear the Lich King’s voice in my
head. My will is my own once again.” It was indeed; and it was purely by that will that she kept the
elation from her voice. She did not wish them to know more than she chose. “You dreadlords seem to
know why.”
 They exchanged glances, their faces curving into smiles. “We’ve discovered that the Lich King is
losing his power,” Varimathras said, hellish glee in his voice. “As it wanes, so too does his ability to
command undead such as you.”
 That was good news indeed, if it were actually true. But it was not specific enough for Sylvanas.
“And what of King Arthas?” she pressed, unable to keep a sneer out of her voice as she used the death
knight’s title. “What about his powers?”
 Balnazzar waved a black- clawed hand dismissively. “He will cease to annoy us, like a summerfly
whose time has come and gone. Though his runeblade, Frostmourne, carries powerful enchantments,
Arthas’s own powers will fade in time. It is inevitable.”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 178
 Sylvanas was not so certain. She, too, had once underestimated Arthas, and along with the cold
hatred in her heart, she also bore guilt for her part in his blood- soaked victory. “You seek to overthrow
him, and want my help to do it,” she said bluntly.
 Detheroc, the one who appeared to be in charge, had stood quietly by while his brothers spoke to
Sylvanas. They had been angry and impassioned, but his expression had remained neutral. Now, at last
he spoke, in cold tones of utter loathing.
 “The Legion may be defeated, but we are the nathrezim. We’ll not let some upstart human get the
best of us.” He paused, looking at them each in turn. “Arthas must fall!”
 The glowing green gaze settled upon Sylvanas. “As you have been watching us, little ghost, so have
we been observing as well. It is obvious that the lich, Kel’Thuzad, is far too loyal to betray his master.
There appears to be…affection between the two.” His gray lips curved in a dangerous smile. “But you,
on the other hand…”
 “Hate him.” She did not think she could hide that truth even if she wanted to, so fiercely did it burn
inside her. “We are united in that much, dreadlord. I have my own reasons for seeking vengeance.
Arthas murdered my people and turned me into this…monstrosity.” She paused for a moment, the
loathing—of both Arthas and what he had done to her—so intense it took away her ability to speak.
They waited, patiently, smugly.
 They thought they could use her. They would be wrong.
 “I may take part in your bloody coup, but I will do so in my own way.” She wanted them as allies,
but they needed to know that she would be no toy. “I will not exchange one master for another. If you
wish my aid, then you must accept that.”
 Detheroc smiled. “We will slay the death knight together, then.”
 Sylvanas nodded, and a slow smile crept across her ghostly face.
 Your days have numbers, King Arthas Menethil. And I…I am the hourglass.
 World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 CHAPTER TWENTY- TWO
 Arthas rubbed his temple, going over and over the visions he had seen. Always before,
communication from the Lich King had come only from Frostmourne. But the instant the crippling
pain had struck him, Arthas had actually seen the being he served for the first time.
 The Lich King was alone, in the middle of a vast cavern, as imprisoned in the unnatural ice as
Frostmourne had been. But this had been no sleek covering of his form. The encasing ice had been
fractured, as if someone had broken off a piece and left the jagged remains behind. Obscured by the ice
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 179
as he was, the Lich King was imperfectly glimpsed, but his voice sliced in the death knight’s mind as he
cried out in torment:
 “Danger draws near the Frozen Throne! Power is fading…. Time is running out…. You must return
to Northrend immediately!” And then, piercing Arthas like a lance in the gut: “Obey!”
 Each time it happened, Arthas felt dazed and sick. The power that had pumped through him like
adrenaline when he was merely human was receding, taking with it more than it had originally given.
He was weak and vulnerable…something he had never once imagined he would be when he first
grasped Frostmourne and turned away from everything he thought he believed in. His face was greasy
with sweat as he laboriously mounted Invincible and rode to meet Kel’Thuzad.
 The lich was waiting for him, hovering, his fluttering robes and general demeanor somehow
radiating concern.
 “So the seizures have been getting worse?” he asked.
 Arthas hesitated. Should he take the lich into his confidence? Would Kel’Thuzad attempt to wrest
power from him? No, he decided. The former necromancer had never led him astray. Always, his
loyalty was to the Lich King and Arthas himself.
 The king nodded. He felt like his head would come off with the gesture. “Yes. With my powers
drained, I can barely command my own warriors. The Lich King warned me that if I didn’t reach
Northrend soon, all could be lost. We must depart quickly.”
 If it was possible for blazing, empty eye sockets to exude worry, then Kel’Thuzad’s did so now. “Of
course, Your Majesty. You have not and will not be forsaken. We will depart as soon as you believe you
are—”
 “There’s been a change of plans, King Arthas. You’re not going anywhere.”
 It was evidence of his weakening powers that he had not even sensed them. Arthas stared, utterly
taken by surprise as the three dreadlords surrounded him.
 “Assassins!” cried Kel’Thuzad. “It’s a trap! Defend your king from those—”
 But the sound of a gate slamming shut drowned out the lich’s call to action. Arthas drew
Frostmourne. For the first time since he had touched, had bonded with the sword, it felt heavy and
almost lifeless in his hands. The runes along its blade barely gleamed at all, and it felt more like a lump
of metal than the well- balanced, beautiful weapon it had always been.
 The undead rushed at him, and for a wild moment Arthas was catapulted back in time to his first
encounter with the walking dead. He was again standing outside the little farmhouse, assaulted by the
stench of decay and almost numbed with horror as things that should have been dead attacked him.
He had long since moved past any horror or repugnance at their existence; indeed, he had come to
think of them with affection. They were his subjects; he had cleansed them of life, to serve the great
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 180
glory of the Lich King. It was not that they moved, or fought; it was that they fought him. They were
utterly under the control of dreadlords. Grimly, using all the strength he yet possessed, he fought them
back, a strange, sickening sensation filling him. He had never expected they would turn on him.
 Over the sounds of the conflict, Balnazzar’s voice reached Arthas, the tone gloating. “You should
never have returned, human. Weakened as you are, we have assumed control over the majority of your
warriors. It seems your reign was short- lived, King Arthas.”
 Arthas gritted his teeth and from somewhere deep inside him dredged up more energy, more will to
fight. He would not die here.
 But there were so many of them—so many that he had once nearly effortlessly directed and
commanded, now turning implacably against him. He knew they were mindless, that they would obey
whoever was the strongest. And yet somehow…it hurt. He’d made them….
 He was growing increasingly weak, and at one point was even unable to block a blow directly to his
midsection. The dull sword clanged against his armor, and he suffered no major wound, but that the
ghoul had gotten past his defenses alarmed him.
 “There are too many of them, my king!” Kel’Thuzad’s sepulchral voice said, the tenor of loyalty in it
bringing unexpected tears to Arthas’s eyes. “Flee—escape from the city! I’ll find my way out and meet
you in the wilderness. It is your only chance, my liege!”
 He knew the lich was right. With a cry, Arthas clumsily dismounted. A wave of his hand and
Invincible became insubstantial, a ghost horse instead of a skeletal one, and disappeared. Arthas would
summon him again when he was safely away. He charged, gripping the enfeebled Frostmourne in both
hands and swinging, no longer trying to kill or even wound his opponents—they were indeed too many
—but simply to clear a path.
 The gates were closed, but this palace was where he had grown to manhood, and he knew it
intimately. Knew every gate, wall, and hidden passageway, and instead of heading for the gates, which
he would be unable to raise by himself, he went deeper into the palace. The undead followed. Arthas
raced through the back corridors that had once been the private quarters of the royal family, which he
had once traversed with Jaina’s hand clasped tightly in his. He stumbled and his mind reeled.
 How had he come to this moment—fleeing through an empty palace from his own creations, his
subjects, whom he had vowed to protect. But no—he’d slain them. Betrayed his subjects for the power
the Lich King offered. The power that was now bleeding from him as if from a wound that could not
be closed.
 Father…Jaina…
 He closed his mind against the memories. Distractions would not serve him. Only speed and
cunning would.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 181
 The narrow passageways limited the number of undead able to follow, and he was able to close and
bolt the doors against them, delaying them. Finally he reached his quarters and the secret exit built into
the wall. He, his parents, and Calia each had one…known only to them, Uther, and the bishop. All
were gone now, save he, and Arthas pushed aside the hanging tapestry to reveal the small door hidden
behind it, closing and bolting it behind him.
 He ran, stumbling in his weakness, down the tight, twining staircase that would lead to his
freedom. The door was both physically and magically disguised to look exactly like the main walls of
the palace from the outside. Arthas, gasping, fumbled with the bolt and half fell out into the dim light
of Tirisfal Glades. The sound of battle reached his ears and he looked up, catching his breath. He
blinked, confused. The undead…were fighting one another.
 Of course—some of them were still under his command. Were still his subjects—
 His tools. His weapons. Not his subjects.
 He watched for a moment, leaning against the cold stone. An abomination under the control of his
enemy lopped off a long- eared head and sent it flying. A shiver of disgust went through him at the
sight of both sets of undead. Decomposing, maggot- ridden, shambling things. No matter who
controlled them, they were foul. A glimmer caught his eye; a forlorn little ghost, hovering timidly, who
had once been an adolescent girl. Once been alive. He’d killed her, too, directly or indirectly. His
subject. She seemed still connected to that world of the living. Seemed to remember what being
human had once meant. He could use that; use her. He extended his hand to this floating, spectral
thing he had made out of his lust for power.
 “I have need of your abilities, little shade,” he said, pitching his voice to sound as kindly as possible.
“Will you help me?”
 Her face lit up and she floated to his side. “I live only to serve you, King Arthas,” she said, her voice
still sweet despite its hollow echo. He forced himself to return her smile. It was easier, when they were
simply rotting flesh. But this had its advantages, too.
 Through sheer will, he summoned more and more of them, exerting himself so hard his breath
came in gasps. They came. They would serve whoever was strongest. With a roar, Arthas descended
upon those who would dare stand in the way of the destiny he had bought so dearly. But even as more
came to his side, so did more come to attack him. Weak, so weak he was, with only these lumps of meat
to protect him. He was shaking and gasping, heaving Frostmourne about with arms that grew
increasingly weary. The earth trembled and Arthas whirled to behold no fewer than three
abominations lumbering toward him.
 Grimly, he lifted Frostmourne. He, Arthas Menethil, King of Lordaeron, would not go down
without a fight.
 Suddenly there was a flurry of motion, accompanied by anguished cries. Like the ghosts of birds,
the blurs dipped and dove, harrying the monstrosities who paused in their pursuit of Arthas to bat and
roar at the spectral figures, who suddenly seemed to dive right inside the creatures.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 182
 The slimy, white, maggoty things froze, and then abruptly turned their attention to the shambling
ghouls that were attacking Arthas. A grin spread across the death knight’s pale face. The banshees. He
had thought Sylvanas too lost in her hatred to come to his aid, or worse, like so many of his warriors,
turned to become a pawn of his enemies. But it would seem that the former ranger- general’s irritation
with him was spent.
 With the aid of the banshee- possessed abominations, the tide quickly turned, and a few moments
later Arthas stood, weaving with a sudden weakness over a pile of corpses that were truly dead. The
abominations turned on one another and hacked themselves to grisly bits. Arthas wondered if even
their creators could have sewn back what was left of them. As they fell to the earth, the spirits that had
possessed them darted free.
 “You have my thanks, my ladies. I am glad to see that you and your mistress remain among my
allies.”
 They hovered, their voices soft and haunting. “Indeed, great king. She sent us to find you. We’ve
come to escort you across the river. Once we cross it we’ll take refuge in the wilderness.”
 The wilderness—the same phrase Kel’Thuzad had used. Arthas relaxed even further. Clearly, his
right and left hand were in agreement. He lifted a hand and concentrated. “Invincible, to me!” he
called. A moment later a small patch of mist appeared, swirling and taking on the shape of a skeletal
horse. A heartbeat later, Invincible was there in reality. Arthas was pleased to notice that the act took
little effort; Invincible loved him. This was the one thing he had done completely right. The one dead
thing that would never, ever turn against him, any more than the great animal would have done in its
life. Carefully, he mounted, doing his best to hide his weakness from the banshees and the other
undead.
 “Lead me to your mistress and Kel’Thuzad, and I shall follow,” he said.
 They did, floating away from the palace and deep into the heart of Tirisfal Glades. Arthas noticed
with a sudden unease that the path they were taking led uncomfortably near the Balnir farm.
Fortunately, the banshees veered off, heading into a hillier area and through there to a wide- open field.
 “This is the place, sisters. We’ll rest here, great king.”
 There was no sign of Sylvanas, nor of Kel’Thuzad. Arthas drew rein on Invincible, looking around.
He felt a sudden prickling of apprehension. “Why here?” he demanded. “Where is your mistress?”
 The pain descended again and he cried out, clutching his chest. Invincible pranced beneath him,
anxious, and Arthas clung on for dear life. The gray- green glade went away, replaced by the blues and
whites of the oddly broken Frozen Throne. The Lich King’s voice stabbed in his head and Arthas bit
back a whimper.
 “You have been deceived! Come to my side at once! Obey!”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 183
 “What is…happening here?” Arthas managed through gritted teeth. He blinked, forcing his vision to
clear, and lifted his head, grunting with the effort.
 She stepped out from behind the trees, carrying a bow. For a wild second, he thought he was back
in Quel’Thalas, facing the living elf. But her hair was no longer golden, but black as midnight with
streaks of white. Her skin was pale with a bluish tinge to it, and her eyes glowed silver. It was Sylvanas,
and yet it was not. For this Sylvanas was neither alive, nor incorporeal. Somehow, she had gotten her
body back from where he had ordered it left—safely locked in an iron coffin to be used as additional
torment against her. But she had turned the tables on him.
 As he struggled to make sense of what was happening through the pain, Sylvanas lifted her sleek
black bow, drew, and took aim. Her lips curved in a smile.
 “You walked right into this one, Arthas.”
 She released the arrow.
 It impaled his left shoulder, piercing through his armor as if it were as flimsy as parchment, adding a
fresh type of agony. He was confused for an instant—Sylvanas was a master archer. She couldn’t
possibly miss a fatal shot at this distance. Why the shoulder? His right hand went up automatically, but
he found he couldn’t even curl his fingers around the shaft. They were becoming numb—as were his
feet, his legs…
 He flung himself onto Invincible’s neck, draping and doing what he could to cling to his mount
with limbs that were rapidly becoming useless. He could barely turn his head to stare at her and rasp
out the words, “Traitor! What have you done to me?”
 She was smiling. She was happy. Slowly, languorously, she strode toward him. She was wearing
the same outfit she had when he had killed her, revealing a great deal of her pale blue- white skin.
Oddly, though, her body bore no scars from the innumerable wounds she had received on that day.
 “It’s a special poisoned arrow I made just for you,” she said as she approached him. She shifted the
bow to her back and drew a dagger, fingering it. “The paralysis you’re experiencing now is but a
fraction of the agony you’ve caused me.”
 Arthas swallowed. His mouth was dry as sand. “Finish me, then.”
 She threw back her head and laughed, hollow and ghostly. “A quick death…like the one you gave
me?” Her mirth faded as quickly as it had come, and her eyes flashed red. She continued her approach
until she was only an arm’s length away. Invincible pranced uncertainly at her proximity, and Arthas’s
heart lurched as he almost slipped off.
 “Oh no. You have taught me well, Arthas Menethil. You taught me about the folly of showing
mercy to my enemies, and the delight of exacting torment from them. And so, my tutor, I’ll show you
how well I learned those lessons. You’re going to suffer as I did. Thanks to my arrow, you can’t even
run.”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 184
 Arthas’s eyes seemed to be the only thing that could move, and he watched helplessly as she lifted
the dagger. “Give my regards to hell, you son of a bitch.”
 No. Not this way—not paralyzed and helpless…Jaina…
 Sylvanas suddenly staggered back, the pale hand that clutched the dagger twisting and opening.
The look on her face was utter astonishment. A heartbeat later, the little shade that had come to
Arthas’s aid earlier materialized, smiling happily at the thought that she had helped to save her king.
Happy to serve.
 “Back, you mindless ones! You shall not fall today, my king!”
 Kel’Thuzad! He had come as he had promised, finding Arthas all the way out here where the
traitorous banshee had lured him. And he had not come alone. Well over a dozen undead were with
him, and they now launched themselves at Sylvanas and her banshees. Hope rose inside him, but he
was still paralyzed, still unable to move. He watched as the fight raged around him, and in a few
moments it was obvious that Sylvanas would need to retreat.
 She shot him a look, and again her eyes flashed red. “This isn’t over, Arthas! I’ll never stop hunting
you.”
 Arthas was looking directly at her as she seemed to melt into the shadows. The last parts of her to
vanish were her crimson eyes. With their mistress gone, the other banshees under Sylvanas’s command
disappeared as well. Kel’Thuzad hastened to Arthas’s side.
 “Did she harm you, my liege?”
 Arthas could only stare at him, the paralysis so far gone he could not even move his lips. Bony hands
folded with surprising delicacy around the arrow and tugged. Arthas bit back a cry of pain as the arrow
came free. His red blood was mixed with a gooey black substance, which Kel’Thuzad examined
carefully.
 “The effects of her arrow will wear off in time. It seems the poison was meant only to immobilize
you.”
 Of course, Arthas thought; otherwise she would not have needed the dagger. Relief shuddered
through him, leaving him even more exhausted. He had come very close—too close—to his death. If
not for the loyalty of the lich, the elf would have had him. He tried again to speak and managed, “I—
you saved me.”
 Kel’Thuzad inclined his horned head. “I am grateful I could be of assistance, my king. But you must
hasten from this place, to Northrend. All the preparations for your journey have been made. What is it
you would have of me?”
 Kel’Thuzad had been right. Even now, Arthas was beginning to feel some semblance of life
returning to his limbs, though not enough that he could move under his own power.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 185
 “I need to find the Lich King as soon as possible. Much longer and…I don’t know what the future
holds, or if I’ll even return, but I want you to watch over this land. See to it that my legacy endures.”
 He trusted the lich, not out of affection or loyalty, but simply as a cold, hard fact. Kel’Thuzad was
an undead thing, bound to the master they both served. Arthas’s eyes flitted to the little ghost,
hovering, smiling, a few feet away, and to the slack- faced, rotting corpses who would walk off a cliff if
he told them to.
 Just dead meat and sundered spirits. Not subjects. And they never had been. No matter what the
little shade’s smile said.
 “You honor me, my liege. I shall do as you ask, King Arthas. I shall.”

 She had a body now, what her own had once been, though changed, as she had been changed.
Sylvanas walked with the same easy stride she had had in life, wore the same armor. But it was not the
same. She was forever, irrevocably altered.
 “You seem troubled, mistress.”
 Sylvanas started from her reverie and turned to the banshee, one of the many who floated beside
her. She could float with them, but she preferred the heaviness, the solidity, of the corporeal form she
had stolen back for herself.
 “Aren’t you, sister?” she answered curtly. “Only days ago we were the Lich King’s slaves. We existed
only to slaughter in his name. And now we are…free.”
 “I don’t understand, mistress.” The banshee’s voice was hollow and confused. “Our wills are our own
now. Is that not what you fought for? I thought you’d be overjoyed.”
 Sylvanas laughed, aware that it was perilously close to hysteria. “What joy is there in this curse? We
are still undead, sister—still monstrosities.” She extended a hand, examined the blue- gray flesh,
noticed the cold that clung to her like a second skin. “What are we if not slaves to this torment?”
 He had taken so much. Even if she extended his death over a period of days…weeks…she would
never be able to make Arthas suffer sufficiently. His death would not bring back the dead, cleanse the
Sunwell, nor restore her to her living, peach- and- gold self. But it would feel…very good.
 He had eluded her at their confrontation several days past. His lackey, the lich, had come at
precisely the wrong moment. Arthas had gone far beyond her grasp now, trying to heal himself. She
had learned that he’d left Kel’Thuzad in control of these plagued lands. But that was all right. She was
dead. She had all the time in the world to plot an exquisite revenge.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 186
 A movement caught her eye and she got gracefully to her feet, drawing the bow and nocking it in
one single, swift movement. The swirling portal opened and Varimathras stood there, grinning
patronizingly down at her.
 “Greetings, Lady Sylvanas.” The demon actually bowed. Sylvanas raised an eyebrow. She did not
for a minute think he meant it. “My brothers and I appreciate the role you played in overthrowing
Arthas.”
 The role she played. Like this was some sort of theatrical game.
 “Overthrow? I suppose one could call it that. He has scurried away, that much is sure.”
 The mighty being shrugged, his wings spreading slightly with the gesture. “Either way, he no
longer troubles us. I’ve come to offer you a formal invitation to join our new order.”
 A “new order.” Not very new at all, she mused; same subjugation, different master. She could not
have been less interested.
 “Varimathras,” she said coldly. She did not bow in return. “My only interest was in seeing Arthas
dead. Since I failed in my first attempt at this goal, I now wish to concentrate my efforts on succeeding
the next time. I have no time for your petty politics or power mongering.”
 The demon bridled. “Careful, milady. It would be unwise to incur our wrath. We are the future of
these…Plaguelands. You can either join us and rule, or be cast aside.”
 “You? The future? Kel’Thuzad did not go with his precious Arthas. He was left here for a reason.
But perhaps a lich reborn by the very essence of the mighty Sunwell is nothing to beings as powerful as
you.” Her voice dripped scorn, and the dreadlord frowned terribly.
 “I’ve lived as a slave long enough, dreadlord.” Funny, how one used the word “lived,” even though
one was dead. Old habits died hard, it would seem. “I have fought tooth and nail to become more than
what that bastard made me. I have my own will now, and I choose my own path. The Legion is
defeated. You are the last pathetic remnants. You are a dying breed. I won’t relinquish my freedom by
shackling myself to you fools.”
 “So be it,” Varimathras hissed. He was furious. “Our reply will come soon.”
 He teleported out, his face twisted in a scowl.
 Her needling had gotten to him, and he fairly quivered with outrage. She noted this
dispassionately. He was easy to anger; he was the one they had sent to her, thinking her no great
threat.
 She would need more than a handful of banshees to fight Arthas. She would need an army, a city of
the dead…she would need Lordaeron. The Forsaken, she would call these lost souls who, like her, did
not breathe but who yet had their own will. And even more immediately, she would need more than
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 187
her spectral sisters to fight the three demonic brothers. Or maybe there would be only two she needed
to fight.
 Sylvanas Windrunner thought again of Varimathras, how easy he was to manipulate.
 Perhaps this one could be useful….
 Yes. She and the Forsaken would find their own path in this world…and would slaughter anyone
who stood in their way.
 World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 CHAPTER TWENTY- THREE
 Northrend. There was an odd sense of coming home. As the shore came into view, Arthas
remembered the first time he had arrived here, his heart full of pain at Jaina and Uther’s betrayal,
aching at the necessity of what he had been forced to do at Stratholme. So much had happened that it
felt like a lifetime ago. He had come then with vengeance in his heart, to kill the demon lord
responsible for turning his people into the walking dead. Now, he ruled those walking dead and was
allies with Kel’Thuzad.
 Strange, the twists and turns of fate.
 He did not feel the cold, as he had then. Nor did the men who had followed him so loyally; death
dulled sensations for such things. Only the human necromancers bundled up against the icy wind that
sighed and moaned and the snow that began to drift lazily downward as they made anchor and
debarked.
 Arthas moved stiffly from the rowboat onto the shore. He might not feel the cold of this place, but
his powers, and his physical self, were weak. As soon as his feet touched the earth, Arthas felt him—the
Lich King. Not in his mind, not speaking to him through Frostmourne, although the runeblade’s
feeble glow strengthened slightly. No, Arthas sensed him here, his master, as he had not before. And
there was a prickling sensation of increased threat.
 He turned back to the rest of those who were following him ashore—ghouls, specters, shades,
abominations, necromancers. “We must make haste,” he cried. “Something out there is threatening the
Lich King. We must reach Icecrown quickly.”
 “My lord!” one of the necromancers cried, and pointed. Arthas whirled, drawing Frostmourne.
 Through the veil of the falling snow he could see golden- red shapes hovering in the air. They drew
closer, and his eyes narrowed in surprise and anger as he recognized the creatures and realized who
their masters must be.
 Dragonhawks. He was astonished. He had all but exterminated the high elves. How could it be
that any of them survived sufficiently to regroup, let alone determine where he had gone and confront
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 188
him here? A slow smile spread across his handsome features, and he felt the sneaking sensation of
admiration.
 The dragonhawks came closer. He lifted Frostmourne in salute.
 “I have to admit,” he shouted, “I am surprised to see quel’dorei here. I would have thought the cold
too unpleasant for so delicate a people.”
 “Prince Arthas!” The voice came from one of the riders, its beast hovering above Arthas. His voice
rang clear and bright and strong. “You still do not see quel’dorei here. We are the sin’dorei—the blood
elves! We have sworn to avenge the ghosts of Quel’Thalas. This dead land…will be cleansed! The
disgusting things you have created will rest properly at last. And you, butcher, will finally receive your
just punishment.”
 He was amused for a moment. Their numbers were not insignificant. Arthas realized that he was
most likely looking at the last few of an all but extinct race. And they’d come just for him? Then his
smugness faded into irritation. Despite his wearied state, anger filled his voice as he cried, “Northrend
belongs to the Scourge, elf, and you will soon join them! You made a terrible mistake by coming here!”
 More dragonhawks appeared, along with rangers on foot. Arrows flew through the skies, seemingly
as numerous as snowflakes, peppering the undead as they charged. Most of them, however, did not
fall; the sting of arrows, as long as it did not pierce a vital spot, troubled them not at all.
 Not bothering to even mount Invincible, Arthas charged in. Frostmourne hungered; it seemed to
gather energy and strength, as did Arthas himself, with each of the bright, shining souls it consumed.
In the midst of the clamor of battle, he heard a voice that was deep and cold as Northrend itself call out
from a hill above them.
 “Onward for the Scourge! Slay them in Ner’zhul’s name!”
 Despite all he had seen, despite all he had done, Arthas felt a deep chill sweep over him at the sound
of that bone- cold voice. He risked a quick glance upward and his eyes widened at what he beheld.
 Nerubians! Of course—this was their homeland. His heart lifted as they poured forth. He could
make out their shapes through the snow, the familiar, unsettling, scuttling speed with which the
spidery beings descended on their prey. Arthas had to give these so- called sin’dorei credit—they fought
valiantly—but they were hopelessly outnumbered, and soon Arthas was standing in a sea of red- and
gold- clad bodies. He raised his hand, and one by one, the dead elves twitched and lurched to their feet,
staring at him glassy- eyed.
 “More soldiers for the one we serve,” Arthas said. He looked again, and his eyes fell upon the
nerubians’ leader.
 He was larger than those he commanded, towering over them as he moved easily down the snowy
landscape toward Arthas. He moved among them like the king he was, with deliberateness and
precision. Arthas tried to find something familiar in something so incredibly alien to him; to the
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 189
human’s eyes, Anub’arak looked like a cross between a beetle and the other, more spidery- appearing
nerubians he commanded. Arthas found that he had taken an unintentional step backward and forced
himself to stay where he was as the creature approached.
 It kept coming until it was right in front of him, then loomed over him, gazing down with multiple
eyes, a thing of utter horror. His ally.
 Arthas found his voice and forced it to be calm. “Thanks for the assistance, mighty one.”
 The creature inclined its head, mandibles clacking gently as it spoke in that deep, sepulchral tone
that still made Arthas uneasy. “The Lich King sent me to aid you, death knight. I am Anub’arak,
ancient king of Azjol- Nerub. Where is the other?” It reared up on its hind legs, looking about.
 “Other?”
 “Kel’Thuzad,” Anub’arak rumbled again in that hissing, sighing, reverberating voice. He lowered
himself down and fixed Arthas with his multiple- eyed gaze. “I know him. I greeted him when he first
came to serve the Lich King, as I greet you now.”
 Arthas wondered briefly if Kel’Thuzad had felt as unsettled as he upon first encountering this
undead, insectoid king of an ancient race. Surely he had been, he told himself. Surely anyone would be.
 “Your people were a welcome addition to our ranks the first time we attacked these elves,” he said,
glancing again at the fallen sin’dorei. He was very glad Anub’arak’s “people” were on his side. “And I
welcome your aid again now. But we have little time for pleasantries. Since the Lich King sent you,
you must be aware that he is in danger. We must reach Icecrown immediately.”
 “It is so,” rumbled Anub’arak. He bobbed his fearsome head and shifted, extending two of his
forelegs. “I will gather the rest of my people, and we will march together to protect our lord.”
 The massive creature moved off imperiously, summoning his obedient subjects who scurried to him
eagerly. Arthas suppressed a shudder and nudged one of the bodies of the fallen elves. It had been
ripped limb from limb, too badly damaged to be of use. “These elves are pathetic. It’s no wonder we
destroyed their homeland so easily.”
 “Pity I wasn’t there to stop you. It’s been a long time, Arthas.”
 The voice was musical, smooth, cultured…and laced with hatred. Arthas turned, recognizing it,
startled and pleased to find its owner here. The twists and turns of fate indeed.
 “Prince Kael’thas,” he said, grinning. The elf stood a few yards away, the shimmer of his
teleportation spell still fading. Seemingly ageless, he looked exactly the same as Arthas remembered.
No, not exactly. The blue eyes gleamed with suppressed anger. Not the hot rage he had seen upon the
visage the last time they had encountered each other, but a cold, deep- seated fury. He no longer wore
the purple and blue robes of the Kirin Tor, but the traditional crimson hues of his people.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 190
 “Arthas Menethil.” The elf did not use a title. He obviously meant it as a slight, but it bothered
Arthas not at all. He knew well enough what he was, and soon, this too- pretty princeling would know
it also. “I would spit at the thought of your name in my mouth, but you aren’t even worth that.”
 “Ah, Kael,” Arthas said, grinning. “Even your insults are unnecessarily complicated. Glad to see you
haven’t changed—as ineffectual as ever. That raises a question. Why weren’t you at Quel’Thalas
anyway? Content to let other people die for you while you sat snug and secure in your Violet Citadel? I
don’t think you’ll be doing that anymore.”
 Kael’thas gritted his teeth, his eyes narrowing. “That much I will give you. I should have been there.
I was instead trying to help the humans fight the Scourge—the Scourge you unleashed on your own
people. You may not care for your subjects—but I care for mine. I have lost far, far too much in dealing
with humans. I stand only for the elves now. For the sin’dorei—the children of the blood. You will pay,
Arthas. You will pay dearly for what you have done!”
 “You know, I’m almost enjoying this banter. It’s been a long time, hasn’t it? I haven’t seen you
since…” He let the sentence trail away, watching as a muscle twitched near the elf prince’s eye. Yes,
Kael’thas remembered. Remembered stumbling across Jaina and Arthas locked in a deep kiss. The
memory briefly unsettled Arthas as well, and the pleasure he took in inflicting the torment upon
Kael’thas soured ever so slightly. “I must say though, I’m rather disappointed in these elves you lead. I’d
hoped for a better fight. Maybe I killed all the ones with spirit in Quel’Thalas.”
 Kael didn’t rise to the bait. “What you faced here was merely a scouting force. Don’t worry, Arthas,
you’ll have a good challenge shortly. I assure you that defeating Lord Illidan’s army will be far more
difficult.” The prince’s full lips twisted in amusement as Arthas started at the name.
 “Illidan? He’s behind this invasion?” Dammit. It would have been better if he had killed Tichondrius
himself, rather than involving the kaldorei. He’d known Illidan was power hungry. He just hadn’t
realized that the night elf would evolve into so great a threat.
 “He is. Our forces are vast, Arthas.” The silky, rich voice was laced now with delight. The bastard
was really enjoying this. “Even now, they march upon Icecrown Glacier. You’ll never make it in time to
save your precious Lich King. Consider this payment for Quel’Thalas…and other insults.”
 “Other insults?” Arthas grinned. “Perhaps you’d like the details of these other insults. Shall I tell you
what it was like to hold her in my arms, to taste her, to hear her call out my—”
 The pain was worse than it had ever been before.
 Arthas crumpled to his knees. His vision went red. Again he saw the Lich King—Ner’zhul, he
recalled Anub’arak had named him—trapped in the icy prison.
 “Make haste!” the Lich King cried. “My enemies draw near! Our time is almost spent!”
 “Are you well, death knight?”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 191
 Arthas blinked and found himself staring up into the face, if it could be called that, of Anub’arak. A
long arachnid leg was extended toward him, offering him assistance. He hesitated, but was too weak
to rise unaided. Steeling himself, he gripped it and rose. It was like a stick in his hand, dried and almost
—mummified to the touch. He let go as soon as he could stand by himself.
 “My powers are weakening, but I’ll be all right.” He took a steadying breath and glanced around.
“Where is Kael’thas?”
 “Gone.” The voice was cold as stone and laced with displeasure. “He used his magic to teleport
away before we could rend him to pieces.”
 The cowardly mage trick of teleportation again. If only Arthas’s necromancers were capable of such,
the Lich King would not be in the danger he was in. Arthas recalled the other corpses and knew that
such would indeed have been Kael’thas’s fate. “I hate to say it,” he said, “but the damned elf was right.”
He turned to his intimidating ally. “Anub’arak—I had another vision—the Lich King is in immediate
peril. They’re closing in on him—Illidan and Kael’thas. We’ll never reach the glacier in time!”
 I’ve failed….
 Anub’arak did not seem at all perturbed. “Overland, perhaps not,” agreed the mammoth creature. “It
is a long and arduous voyage. But…there is another route we might take, death knight. The ancient,
shattered kingdom of Azjol- Nerub lies deep below us. It was where I once ruled for many years. I
know its corridors and hidden places well. Though it has fallen on dark times, it could provide us a
direct shortcut to the glacier.”
 Arthas looked up. As the raven flew, it was not that long a journey. But across the ice and the
mountains that reared up before them…
 “You’re certain we can reach the glacier through these tunnels?” he asked.
 “Nothing is certain, death knight.” For a moment, it sounded like the nerubian was smirking. “The
ruins will be perilous. But it’s worth the risk.”
 Fallen on dark times. A curious phrase for an ancient, dead, spider- lord to use. Arthas wondered
what that meant.
 He supposed he was about to find out.
 Anub’arak and his subjects set a brisk pace, heading due north. Arthas and his Scourge followers
fell into step, and soon the ocean was left behind. The sun moved quickly across the dim sky, low on
the horizon. The long night was coming. As they marched, Arthas sent some of his warriors to gather
what tree limbs and sticks they could; they would burn through many a torch passing through this
dangerous subterranean kingdom.
 After several hours of excruciatingly slow progress—the undead could not truly feel the cold, but the
wind and snow slowed them—Arthas knew that despite Anub’arak’s nearly wry words, one thing
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 192
actually was certain. He never would have made it in time to save the Lich King—and thus himself—by
heading overland. In the end, it was self- preservation that drove him so hard. The Lich King had
found him, had made him into what he now was. Had granted him great power. Arthas knew and
appreciated it, but his debt to the Lich King was nothing of loyalty. If this great being was slain, there
was no doubt but that Arthas would be the next to die—and, as he had told Uther, he intended to live
forever.
 At last, they reached the gates. So covered with ice and snow were they that Arthas did not
immediately recognize them as such, but Anub’arak halted, reared up, and spread wide two of his eight
legs, indicating what lay ahead of them.
 Curved stone, looking like sickles—or insect legs, Arthas thought—jutted upward, their tips
bending toward one another to form a sort of symbolic tunnel. Ahead, he could make out the gates
themselves. A giant spider was etched upon them. Arthas’s lip curled in disgust, but then he thought of
the statues dotting Stormwind. Was this really so different? The entrance “tunnel” and the gates led
into the heart of what seemed to be an iceberg. For a moment, just a moment, Arthas glanced at the
silent, enormous figure of Anub’arak, thought about spiders and flies, and wondered if he was doing
the right thing.
 “Behold the entrance to a once- powerful and ancient place,” Anub’arak said. “I was lord here, and
my word was obeyed without question. I was mighty and powerful, and I bowed to no one. But things
change. I serve the Lich King now, and my place is defending him.”
 Arthas thought briefly of his outrage at the plague, of his burning need for vengeance…of the look in
his father’s eyes as Frostmourne drank his soul.
 “Things do change,” he said quietly. “But there’s no time to reminisce.” He turned to his strange new
ally and smiled coldly. “Let us descend.”
 World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 CHAPTER TWENTY- FOUR
 Arthas did not know how long they spent beneath the frozen surface of Northrend, in the ancient
and deadly nerubian kingdom. He only knew two things as he trudged out into the light, blinking like
a bat forced out into the sun. One was that he hoped he was in time to defend the Lich King. The
other was that he was grateful, bone- deep, to be out of that place.
 It had been clear that the nerubian kingdom had once been beautiful. Arthas was not sure what he
had expected, but it had not been the haunting, vivid colors of blue and purple, nor the intricate
geometric shapes that denoted different rooms and corridors. These still retained their beauty, but
were like a preserved rose; something that while still lovely, was nonetheless dead. A strange smell
wafted through the place as they walked. Arthas could not place it, nor even categorize it. It was acrid
and stale at once, but not unpleasant, not to one used to the company of the decaying dead.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 193
 It was likely in the end a shorter route, as Anub’arak had promised, but every step had been bought
with blood. Soon after they had entered, they had come under attack.
 They scuttled out from the darkness, a dozen or more spider- beings chittering angrily as they
descended. Anub’arak and his soldiers met them head- on. Arthas had hesitated for a fraction of a
second, then joined in, ordering his troops to do the same. The vast caverns were filled with the
shrieking and chittering of the nerubians, the guttural groans of the undead, and the agonized cries of
the living necromancers as the nerubians attacked with gobbets of poison. Thick, sticky webbing
trapped several of the fiercer corpses, holding them helpless until snapping mandibles lopped off heads
or stiletto- sharp legs impaled and eviscerated them.
 Anub’arak was a nightmare incarnate. He uttered a dreadful, hollow sound in his guttural native
language, and fell upon his former subjects with devastating consequences. His legs, each working
separately, grabbed and impaled his hapless victims. Vicious pincers sheared off limbs. And the whole
time, the stale air was filled with cries that made Arthas, inured to such things as he was, shiver and
swallow hard.
 The skirmish was violent and costly, but the nerubians eventually retreated to the shadows that had
birthed them. Several of their number were left behind, eight legs squirming violently before the
hapless arachnids curled up on themselves and died.
 “What the hell was that all about?” Arthas had asked, panting and whirling on Anub’arak. “These
nerubians are your kin. Why are they hostile to us?”
 “Many of us who fell during the War of the Spider were brought back to serve the Lich King,”
Anub’arak had replied. “These warriors, however,” and he waved a foreleg at one of the bodies, “never
died. Foolishly, they still fight to liberate Nerub from the Scourge.”
 Arthas glanced down at the dead nerubian. “Foolishly indeed,” he murmured, and lifted a hand. “In
death, they only serve that which they struggled against in life.”
 And so it was that when he finally emerged into the dim light of the overhead world, gulping in the
cold, clean air, his army had swollen with new recruits, freshly dead and utterly his to command.
 Arthas drew Invincible to a halt. He was trembling, badly, and wanted to simply sit and breathe
fresh air for a few moments. The air quickly soured with the rotting stench of his own army. Anub’arak
passed him, pausing to gaze at him implacably for a moment.
 “No time to rest, death knight. The Lich King has need of us. We must serve.”
 Arthas shot the crypt lord a quick glance. Something in the tone of the being’s voice spoke of the
vaguest stirring of—was it resentment? Did Anub’arak serve only because he had to? Would he turn on
the Lich King if he was able to do so—and more to the point, would he turn on Arthas?
 The Lich King’s powers were weakening—and so were Arthas’s powers right along with him. If
they got weak enough…
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 194
 The death knight watched the retreating figure of the crypt lord, took a deep breath, and followed.

 How long the trek through thick snow and scouring winds was, Arthas didn’t know. At one point
he nearly lost consciousness while riding, so weak was he. He came to with a start, terrified at the
lapse, forcing himself to hang on. He could not falter, not now.
 They crested a hill, and Arthas at last saw the glacier in the middle of the valley—and the army that
awaited him. His spirits lifted at the sight of so many assembled to fight for him and the Lich King.
Anub’arak had left many of his warriors behind, and they were there, stoic and ready. Farther down,
though, closer to the glacier, he saw other figures milling about. He was too far away to distinguish
them, but he knew whom they must be. His gaze traveled upward, and his breath caught.
 The Lich King was there, deep inside the glacier. Trapped in his prison, Arthas had seen him so in
the visions. He listened with half an ear as one of the nerubians hastened up to Anub’arak and Arthas
to brief them on the situation.
 “You’ve arrived just in time. Illidan’s forces have taken up positions at the base of the glacier and—”
 Arthas cried out as the worst pain he had yet tasted buffeted him. Again, his world turned the color
of blood as agony racked his body. So close to the Lich King now, the torment he shared with that
great entity was magnified a hundredfold.
 “Arthas, my champion. You have come at last.”
 “Master,” Arthas whispered, his eyes squeezed shut and his fingers pressed in to his temples. “Yes, I
have come. I am here.”
 “There is a fracture in my prison, the Frozen Throne, and my energies are seeping from it,” the Lich
King continued. “That is why your powers have diminished.”
 “But how?” Had someone attacked him? Arthas saw no immediate foes in his vision, surely he was
not too late—
 “The runeblade, Frostmourne, was once locked inside the throne as well. I thrust it from the ice so
that it would find its way to you…and then lead you to me.”
 “And so it has,” Arthas breathed. The Lich King was immobilized, trapped inside the ice. It must
have been through sheer will that he had been able to force the great sword through the ice and send it
to Arthas. Now he recalled the ice that had held Frostmourne—how it had looked jagged, as if it had
been broken off of a larger piece. Such vast power…and all bent toward bringing Arthas to this place.
Step by step, Arthas had been led here. Directed. Controlled…
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 195
 “You must make haste, my champion. My creator, the demon lord Kil’jaeden, sent his agents here to
destroy me. If they should reach the Frozen Throne before you, all will be lost. The Scourge will be
undone. Now hurry! I will grant you all the power I can spare.”
 Coldness suddenly began to seep through Arthas, numbing the angry, raw pain, calming his
thoughts. The energy was so vast, so heady…it was more powerful even than what Arthas had known
before. This, then, was why he had come. To drink deep of this icy draft, to take the cold strength of
the Lich King into himself. He opened his eyes, and his vision was clear. Frostmourne’s runes blazed
to new life, a chill mist seeping up from it. Grinning fiercely, Arthas gripped the blade and lifted it high.
When he spoke, his voice was clear and resonant and carried in the crisp, frigid air.
 “I saw another vision of the Lich King. He has restored my powers! I know now what I must do.”
He pointed with Frostmourne at the doll- sized figures in the distance. “Illidan has mocked the
Scourge long enough. He is attempting to gain entry to the Lich King’s throne chamber. He will fail.
It’s time we put the fear of death back in him. Time to end the game…once and for all.”
 With a fierce challenging cry, he swung Frostmourne over his head. It sang out, hungry for more
souls. “For the Lich King!” Arthas cried, and charged down to meet his enemies.
 He felt like a god as he swung Frostmourne with almost careless ease. Each soul it took only
strengthened him. Let the arrows of the blood elves shower upon them like the snow. They fell like
wheat before the scythe. At one point, Arthas glanced over the battlefield. Where was the one he had
to slay? He saw no sign of Illidan yet. Was it possible he had already gained entrance into the—
 “Arthas! Arthas, turn and fight me, damn you!”
 The voice was clear and pure and full of hatred, and Arthas turned.
 The elven prince was but a few yards away, his red and gold bright as blood against the unforgiving
whiteness of the snow upon which they fought. He was tall and proud, his staff planted in the snow
before him, his eyes fixed on Arthas. Magic crackled around him.
 “You will go no farther, butcher.”
 A muscle twitched near Arthas’s eye. So Sylvanas had called him, too. He made a slight tsking
sound, and grinned at the elf who had once seemed so very powerful and learned to a young human
prince. His mind went back to the moment when Kael had surprised Arthas and Jaina in a kiss. The
boy that Arthas had been then had known himself outmatched by the older, much more powerful
mage.
 Arthas was no longer a boy.
 “After you disappeared in so cowardly a fashion at our last confrontation, I admit, I’m surprised to
see you show your face again, Kael. Don’t be upset that I stole Jaina from you. You should let that go
and move on. After all, there’s so much left in this world for you to enjoy. Oh wait…no there isn’t.”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 196
 “Damn you to hell, Arthas Menethil,” Kael’thas snarled, trembling with outrage. “You’ve taken
everything I ever cared for. Vengeance is all I have left.”
 He wasted no more time in venting his anger, but instead lifted the staff. The crystal affixed to its
tip glowed brightly, and a ball of fire crackled in his free hand. A heartbeat later it had soared toward
Arthas. Shards of ice rained down upon the death knight. Kael’thas was a master mage, and much
faster than anyone Arthas had ever encountered. He barely got Frostmourne up in time to deflect the
surging fiery globe. The frost shards, however, were ease itself. He swung the great runeblade over his
head, and it called to its blade the shards of ice like iron shavings to a magnet. Grinning, Arthas
whirled the sword over his head, directing the pieces of ice back to their sender. He’d been taken by
surprise by Kael’thas’s speed, but he would not make that mistake again.
 “You might want to think twice about attacking me with ice, Kael,” he said, laughing. He needed to
goad the mage into acting rashly. Control was key to the manipulation of magic, and if Kael lost his
temper, he would undoubtedly lose the fight.
 Kael narrowed his eyes. “Thanks for the advice,” he growled. Arthas tightened up on the reins,
preparing to ride down his adversary, but at that instant the snow beneath him glowed bright orange
for a moment and then became water. Invincible suddenly dropped two feet and his hooves slipped on
the slick ground. Arthas leaped off and sent the beast cantering away, gripping Frostmourne with
renewed determination in his right hand. He extended his left. A dark ball of swirling green energy
formed in his flattened palm and sped toward Kael like an arrow shot from a bow. The mage moved to
counter, but the attack was too swift. His face went a shade paler and he stumbled back, his hand
going to his heart. Arthas grinned as some of the mage’s life energy flooded him.
 “I took your woman,” he said, continuing to try to anger the mage, although he knew, and probably
Kael knew, that Jaina had never belonged to the elf. “I held her in my arms at night. She tasted sweet
when I kissed her, Kael. She—”
 “Loathes you now,” Kael’thas replied. “You sicken and disgust her, Arthas. Anything she felt for you
has since turned to hatred.”
 Arthas’s chest contracted oddly. He realized he had not thought about how Jaina regarded him
now. He had always done his best to thrust all thoughts of her away when they drifted into his mind.
Was it true? Did Jaina really—
 An enormous crackling ball of fire exploded against his chest, and Arthas cried out as he was forced
backward by the blow. Flame licked at him for precious seconds before he recovered his wits
sufficiently to counter the spell. The armor had largely protected him, although its heat against his skin
was agonizing, but he was aghast that he had been so taken by surprise. A second ball of fire came, but
this time he was ready, meeting the fiery blast with his own deadly ice.
 “I destroyed your homeland…fouled your precious Sunwell. And I killed your father. Frostmourne
sucked the soul right out of him, Kael. It’s gone forever.”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 197
 “You’re good at killing noble elderly men,” sneered Kael’thas. The jab was unexpectedly painful. “At
least you faced my father on the battlefield. What of your own, Arthas Menethil? How brave of you to
cut down a defenseless parent opening his arms to embrace his—”
 Arthas charged, closing the distance between them in a few strides, and brought Frostmourne
down. Kael’thas parried with his staff. For a second, the stave held, then it broke beneath
Frostmourne’s onslaught. But the delay had bought Kael sufficient time to unsheathe a glittering,
gleaming weapon, a runeblade that seemed to glow red in contrast to Frostmourne’s cold, icy blue.
The blades clashed. Both men pressed down, straining with effort, each one’s blade holding off the
other as the seconds ticked by. Kael’thas grinned as their eyes met.
 “You recognize this blade, do you not?”
 Arthas did. He knew the sword’s name and its lineage—Flamestrike, Felo’melorn, once wielded by
Kael’thas’s ancestor, Dath’Remar Sunstrider, the founder of the dynasty. The sword was almost
unspeakably old. It had seen the War of the Ancients, the birth of the Highborne. Arthas returned the
smirk. Flamestrike would have another significant event to bear witness to; it would now see the end of
the last Sunstrider.
 “Oh, I do. I saw it snap in two beneath Frostmourne, an instant before I slew your father.”
 Arthas was physically stronger, and the energy of the Lich King surged through him. With a ragged
grunt, he shoved Kael’thas backward, thinking to knock him off balance. The mage recovered quickly
and almost danced into another position, brandishing Felo’melorn, his eyes never leaving Arthas.
 “And so I found it, and I had it reforged.”
 “Broken swords are weak where they are mended, elf.” Arthas began to circle, watching for the
instant where Kael would be vulnerable.
 Kael’thas laughed. “Human swords, perhaps. Not elven. Not when they are reforged with magic,
and hatred, and a burning need for revenge. No, Arthas. Felo’melorn is stronger than ever—as am I. As
are the sin’dorei. We are the stronger for having been broken—stronger and filled with purpose. And
that purpose is to see you fall!”
 The attack came suddenly. One moment Kael was standing, ranting, and the next Arthas was
fighting for his very life. Frostmourne clanged against Flamestrike, and damned if the elf wasn’t right—
the blade held. Arthas darted back, feinted, and then brought Frostmourne across in a mighty sweep.
Kael lunged out of its path and whirled to counterattack with a violence and intensity that surprised
Arthas. He was forced back, one step, then two, and then suddenly he slipped and fell. Snarling, Kael
lunged in, thinking to deal the deathblow. But Arthas remembered training with Muradin, long ago,
and the dwarf’s favorite trick suddenly filled his mind. He pulled his legs in tightly and kicked Kael’thas
with all his strength. The mage let out a grunt and was hurtled backward into the snow. Gasping, the
death knight flipped to his feet, hefted Frostmourne with both hands and plunged it down.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 198
 Somehow Flamestrike was there. The blades again strained against each other. Kael’thas’s eyes
burned with hatred.
 But Arthas was the stronger in armed combat; stronger, with the stronger sword, despite Kael’s
gloating about how Felo’melorn was reforged. Slowly, inexorably, as Arthas knew must happen,
Frostmourne descended toward Kael’thas’s bare throat.
 “…she hates you,” Kael whispered.
 Arthas cried out, fury blurring his vision for a moment, and shoved down with all his strength.
 Into the snow and frozen earth.
 Kael’thas was gone.
 “Coward!” Arthas cried, although he knew the prince would not hear him. The bastard had again
teleported away at the last second. Fury raged in him, threatening to cloud his judgment, and he
pushed it aside. He’d been foolish to let Kael’thas rile him so.
 Curse you, Jaina. Even now, you haunt me.
 “Invincible, to me!” he cried, and realized his voice was shaking. Kael’thas was not dead, but he was
out of the way, and that was all that mattered. He wheeled the head of his skeletal horse around, and
charged again toward the fray and the throne chamber of his master.
 He moved through the milling crowd of enemies as if they were so many insects. As they fell, he
reanimated them and sent them against their fellows. The tide of the undead was unstoppable and
implacable. The snow around the base of the spire was churned up and drenched with blood. Arthas
looked about him, at the last few knots of fighting going on. Blood elves—but no sign of their master.
 Where was Illidan?
 A flurry of quick motion caught his eye and he turned. He growled beneath his breath. Another
dreadlord. This one’s back was toward him, black wings outstretched, cloven hooves melting into the
snow.
 Arthas lifted Frostmourne. “I’ve defeated your kind before, dreadlord,” he snarled. “Turn and face
me, if you dare, or flee into the Nether like the coward you demons are.”
 The figure turned, slowly. Massive horns crowned its head. Its lips curved back in a smile. And over
its eyes was a ragged black blindfold. Two green, glowing spots appeared where eyes should have
been.
 “Hello, Arthas.”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 199
 Deep and sinister, the voice had changed, but not as much as the kaldorei’s body. It was still the
same pale lavender hue, etched with the same tattoos and scarifications. But the legs, the wings, the
horns…Arthas immediately understood what must have happened. So that was why Illidan had
become so powerful.
 “You look different, Illidan. I guess the Skull of Gul’dan didn’t agree with you.”
 Illidan threw back his horned head. Dark, rich laughter rumbled from him. “On the contrary, I have
never felt better. In a way, I suppose I should thank you for my present state, Arthas.”
 “Show your appreciation by stepping out of the way, then.” Arthas’s voice was suddenly cold, and
there was no trace of humor in it. “The Frozen Throne is mine, demon. Step aside. Leave this world
and never return. If you do, I’ll be waiting.”
 “We both have our masters, boy. Mine demands the destruction of the Frozen Throne. It would
seem we are at odds,” Illidan replied, and lifted the weapon Arthas had fought once before. His
powerful hands with their sharp black nails closed on the weapon’s center and he whirled it with grace
and a deceptive casualness. Arthas knew a ripple of uncertainty at the display. He had just finished a
fight with Kael’thas, and while he would have been the victor had not the elf, coward that he was,
teleported out at the last instant, he had been taxed by the battle. There was no hint of weariness in
Illidan’s bearing.
 Illidan’s smile grew as he noticed his enemy’s discomfiture. He allowed himself a moment more of
uncannily masterful handling of the unusual, demonic weapon, then struck a position, settling in,
preparing for combat. “It must be done!”
 “Your troops are either in pieces or part of my army.” Arthas drew Frostmourne. Its runes glowed
brightly, and mist curled up from its hilt. Behind the blindfold, Illidan’s eyes—much brighter and more
intensely green than he remembered—narrowed at the sight of the runeblade. If the demonicallychanged kaldorei had a powerful weapon, so too did Arthas. “You’ll end up one or the other.”
 “Doubtful,” Illidan sneered. “I am stronger than you know, and my master created yours! Come,
pawn. I’ll dispatch the servant before I dispatch your pathetic—”
 Arthas charged. Frostmourne glowed and hummed in his hands, as eager for Illidan’s death as he
was. The elf did not seem at all startled by the sudden rush, and with the utmost ease lifted his doublebladed weapon to parry. Frostmourne had broken ancient and powerful swords before, but this time, it
simply clanged and grated against the glowing green metal.
 Illidan gave him a smirk as he held his ground. Arthas again felt unease flicker through him. Illidan
was indeed changed by absorbing the power of the Skull of Gul’dan; for one thing, he was physically
much stronger than he had been. Illidan chuckled, a deep and ugly sound, then shoved forcefully. It
was Arthas who was forced to fall back, dropping to one knee to defend himself as the demon bore
down on him.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 200
 “It is sweet to turn the tables thus,” Illidan growled. “I might just kill you quickly, death knight, if
you give me a good fight.”
 Arthas didn’t waste breath on insults. He gritted his teeth and concentrated on battling back the
blows that were being rained upon him. The weapon was a swirl of glowing green. He could feel the
power of demonic energy radiating from it, just as he knew that Illidan could sense Frostmourne’s grim
darkness.
 Suddenly Illidan was not there and Arthas lurched forward, his momentum taking him off balance.
He heard a flapping sound and whirled to see Illidan overhead, his great, leathery wings creating a
strong wind as he hovered out of reach.
 They eyed each other, Arthas catching his breath. He could see Illidan was not unaffected by the
battle either. Sweat gleamed on the massive, lavender- hued torso. Arthas settled himself, Frostmourne
at the ready for when Illidan would swoop in for a renewed assault.
 Then Illidan did something utterly unexpected. He laughed, shifted the weapon in his hands—and
in a flurry of motion seemingly snapped it in two. Each powerful hand now held a single blade.
 “Behold the Twin Blades of Azzinoth,” Illidan gloated. He flew up higher, whirling the blades in
his left and right hands, and Arthas realized that he favored neither one. “Two magnificent warglaives.
They can be wielded as a single devastating weapon…or, as you see, as two. It was the favored weapon
of a doomguard—a powerful demon captain whom I slew. Ten thousand years ago. How long have
you fought with your pretty blade, human? How well do you know it?”
 The words were intended to unsettle the death knight. Instead, they invigorated him. Illidan might
have had this admittedly powerful weapon for longer—but Frostmourne was bound to Arthas, and he
to it. It was not a sword as much as an extension of himself. He had known it when he first had the
vision of it, when he had just arrived in Northrend. He had been certain of the connection when he laid
eyes upon it, waiting for him. And now he felt it surge in his hand, confirming their unity.
 The demon blades gleamed. Illidan dropped down on Arthas like a stone. Arthas cried out and
countered, more certain of this blow than of any he had dealt with the runeblade before, swinging
Frostmourne up underneath the descending demon. And as he knew must happen, he felt the sword
bite deep into flesh. He pulled, drawing the gash across Illidan’s torso, and felt a deep satisfaction as
the former kaldorei screamed in agony.
 And yet the bastard would not fall. Illidan’s wings beat erratically, still somehow keeping him aloft,
and then before Arthas’s shocked gaze his body seemed to shift and darken…almost as if it was made of
writhing black, purple, and green smoke.
 “This is what you have given me,” Illidan cried. His voice, bass to begin with, had somehow grown
even deeper. Arthas felt it shiver along his bones. The demon’s eyes glowed fiercely in the swirling
darkness that was his face. “This gift—this power. And it will destroy you!”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 201
 A scream was torn from Arthas’s throat, and he fell again to his knees. Blazing green fire chased
itself along his armor, seared his flesh, even dulled Frostmourne’s blue glow for a moment. Over the
raw cry of his own torment he heard Illidan laughing. Again the fel fire cascaded over him and Arthas
fell forward, gasping. But as the fire faded and he saw Illidan swooping in for the kill, he felt the
ancient runeblade he still managed to grasp urge him to rally.
 Frostmourne was his, and he its, and so united, they were invincible.
 Just as Illidan lifted his blades for the kill, Arthas raised Frostmourne, thrusting upward with all his
strength. He felt the blade connect, pierce flesh, strike deep.
 Illidan fell hard to the ground. Blood gushed from his bare torso, melting the snow around it with a
slow hissing sound. His chest rose and fell in gasps. His vaunted twin blades were of no use now. One
had been knocked from his grasp, the other lay in a hand that could not even curl around its hilt. Arthas
got to his feet, his body still tingling with the remnants of the fel fire Illidan had hurled at him. He
stared at him for a long moment, branding the sight into his mind. He thought about dealing the
killing blow, but decided to let the merciless cold of the place do it for him. A greater need burned in
him now, and he turned, lifting his eyes to the spire that towered above him.
 He swallowed hard and simply stood for a moment, knowing, without knowing how he knew it,
that something was about to fundamentally change. Then he took a deep breath and entered the
cavern.
 Arthas moved almost as if in a daze, down the lengths of twining tunnels that led ever deeper into
the bowels of the earth. His feet seemed guided, and while there was no noise, certainly no one to
challenge his right to be here, he felt, rather than heard, a deep thrum of power. He continued to
descend, feeling that call of power drawing him ever closer to his destiny.
 Up ahead was a cold, blue- white light. Arthas moved toward it, almost breaking into a run, and the
tunnel opened up into what Arthas could only think of as a throne chamber. For just ahead was a
structure that made Arthas’s breath catch in his throat.
 The Lich King’s prison sat atop of this twining tower, this spire of blue- green, shimmering icethat- was- not- ice that rose up as if to pierce the very roof of the cavern. A narrow walkway wound,
serpentine, about the spire, leading him upward. Still filled with the energy granted to him by the Lich
King, Arthas did not tire, but unwelcome memories seemed to dart at him like flies as he ascended,
putting one booted foot in front of the other. Words, phrases, images came back to him.
 “Remember, Arthas. We are paladins. Vengeance cannot be a part of what we must do. If we allow
our passions to turn to bloodlust, then we will become as vile as the orcs.”
 Jaina…oh, Jaina…“No one can seem to deny you anything, least of all me.”
 “Don’t deny me, Jaina. Don’t ever deny me. Please.”
 “I never would, Arthas. Never.”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 202
 He kept going, relentlessly moving upward.
 “We know so little—we can’t just slaughter them like animals out of our own fear!”
 “This is bad business, lad. Leave it be. Let it stay here, lost and forgotten…. We’ll find another way
tae save yer people. Let’s leave now, go back, and find that way.”
 One foot followed the other. Upward, ever upward. An image of black wings brushed his memory.
 “I will leave you one final prediction. Just remember, the harder you strive to slay your enemies, the
faster you’ll deliver your people into their hands.”
 Even as these memories tugged at him, clutched at his heart, there was one image, one voice, that
was stronger and more compelling than all the others, whispering, encouraging him: “Closer you draw,
my champion. My moment of freedom comes…and with it, your ascension to true power.”
 Upward he climbed, his gaze ever on the peak. On the huge chunk of deep blue ice that imprisoned
the one who had first set Arthas’s feet on this path. Closer it drew, until Arthas came to a halt a few feet
away. For a long moment, he regarded the figure trapped within, imperfectly glimpsed. Mist rolled off
the huge chunk of ice, further obscuring the image.
 Frostmourne glowed in his hand. From deep inside, Arthas saw the barest hint of an answering
flare of two points of glowing blue light.
 “RETURN THE BLADE,” came the deep, rasping voice in Arthas’s mind, almost unbearably
loud. “COMPLETE THE CIRCLE. RELEASE ME FROM THIS PRISON!”
 Arthas took a step forward, then another, lifting Frostmourne as he moved until he was running.
This was the moment it had all been leading to, and without realizing it, a roar built in his throat and
tore free as he swung the blade down with all of his strength.
 A massive cracking resounded through the chamber as Frostmourne slammed down. The ice
shattered, huge chunks flying in every direction. Arthas lifted his arms to shield himself, but the shards
flew past him harmlessly. Pieces fell from the imprisoned body, and the Lich King cried out, lifting his
armored arms to the sky. More groaning, cracking sounds came from the cavern and from the being
himself, so loud that Arthas winced and covered his ears. It was as if the very world was tearing itself
apart. Suddenly the armored figure that was the Lich King seemed to shatter as his prison did, falling
apart before Arthas’s stunned gaze.
 There was nothing—no one—inside.
 Only the armor, icy black, clattering to lie in pieces. The helm, empty of its owner’s head, slid to a
halt to lie at Arthas’s feet. He stared down at it for a long moment, a deep shiver passing through him.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 203
 All this time…he had been chasing a ghost. Had the Lich King ever really been here? If not—who
had thrust Frostmourne from the ice? Who had demanded to be freed? Was he, Arthas Menethil,
supposed to have been the one encased in the Frozen Throne all along?
 Had this ghost he’d been chasing…been himself?
 Questions that would likely never have answers. But one thing was clear to him. As Frostmourne
had been for him, so was the armor. Gauntleted fingers closed over the spiked helm and he lifted it
slowly, reverently, and then, closing his eyes, he lowered it onto his white head.
 He was suddenly galvanized, his body tensing as he felt the essence of the Lich King enter him. It
pierced his heart, stopped his breath, shivered along his veins, icy, powerful, crashing through him like
a tidal wave. His eyes were closed, but he saw, he saw so much—all that Ner’zhul, the orc shaman, had
known, all he had seen, had done. For a moment, Arthas feared he would be overwhelmed by it all,
that in the end, the Lich King had tricked him into coming here so that he could place his essence in a
fresh new body. He braced himself for a battle for control, with his body as the prize.
 But there was no struggle. Only a blending, a melding. All around him, the cavern continued to
collapse. Arthas was only barely aware of it. His eyes darted rapidly back and forth beneath his closed
lids.
 His lips moved. He spoke.
 They…spoke.
 “Now…we are one.”
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 204
 World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 EPILOGUE: THE LICH KING
 The blue and white world blurred in Arthas’s dream vision. The cold, pure colors shifted, changed
to the warm hues of wood and fire- and torchlight. He had done as he said he would; he had
remembered his life, all that had gone before, had again walked the path that had taken him to the seat
of the Frozen Throne and this deep, deep dreaming state.
 But the dream was not over, it would seem. He again sat at the head of the long, beautifully carved
table that took up most of this illusionary Great Hall.
 And the two who had such an interest in his dream were still there, watching him.
 The orc on his left, elderly but still powerful, searched his face, and then began to smile, the gesture
stretching the image of the white skull painted on his face. And on his right, the boy—the emaciated,
sickly boy—looked even worse than Arthas remembered him looking when he had entered the dream
of remembrance.
 The boy licked cracked, pale lips and drew breath as if to speak, but it was the orc whose words
shattered the stillness first.
 “There is so much more,” he promised.
 Images crowded Arthas’s mind, interweaving and lying atop one another into glimpses of the future
and past entangled. An army of humans on horseback, carrying the flag of Stormwind…fighting
alongside, not against, a Horde raiding party mounted atop snarling wolves. They were allies,
attacking the Scourge together. The scene shifted, changed. Now the humans and orcs were attacking
one another—and the undead, some crying out orders and fighting with minds that were clearly their
own—were standing shoulder to shoulder with the orcs, strange- looking bull- men, and trolls.
 Quel’Thalas—undamaged? No, no, there was the scar he and his army had left—but the city was
being rebuilt….
 Faster now the images poured into his mind, dizzying, chaotic, disordered. It was impossible to tell
the past from the future now. Another image, that of skeletal dragons raining destruction down on a
city Arthas had never seen before—a hot, dry place crowded with orcs. And—yes, yes it was
Stormwind itself that was now coming under attack from the undead dragons—
 Nerubians—no, no, not nerubians, not Anub’arak’s people, but kin to them, yes. A desert race, these
were. Their servants were mammoth creatures with the heads of dogs, golems made of obsidian, who
strode across the shining yellow stands.
 A symbol appeared, one Arthas knew—the L of Lordaeron, impaled by a sword, but depicted in
red, not blue. The symbol changed, became a red flame on a white background. The flame seemed to
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 205
spark to a life of its own and engulfed the background, burning it away to reveal the silvery waters of a
vast expanse of water…a sea…
 …Something was roiling just beneath the ocean’s surface. The hitherto- smooth surface began to
churn wildly, seething, as if from a storm, although the day was clear. A horrible sound that Arthas
only dimly recognized as laughter assaulted his ears, along with the screaming of a world wrenched
from its proper place, hauled upward to face the light of day it had not seen in uncounted centuries….
 Green—all was green, shadowy and nightmarish, grotesque images dancing at the corner of
Arthas’s mind only to dart away before they could be firmly grasped. There was a brief glimpse, gone
now—antlers? A deer? A man? It was hard to tell. Hope hung about the figure, but there were forces
bent on destroying it….
 The mountains themselves came to life, taking giant strides, crushing everything luckless enough to
cross their paths. With each mammoth footfall, the world seemed to tremble and shake.
 Frostmourne. This at least he knew, and intimately. The sword whirled end over end, as if Arthas
has tossed it into the air. A second sword rose to meet it—long, inelegant but powerful, with the
symbol of a skull embedded in its fearsome blade. A name—“Ashbringer,” a sword and yet more than a
sword, as was Frostmourne. The two clashed—
 Arthas blinked and shook his head. The visions, tumbled, chaotic, heartening, and disturbing—
were gone.
 The orc chuckled, the painted skull on his face stretching with the gesture. He had once been
named Ner’zhul, had once had the gift of true visioning. Arthas did not doubt that all he had seen,
though imperfectly understood, would indeed come to pass.
 “So much more,” the orc repeated, “but only if you continue to walk this path fully.”
 Slowly, the death knight turned his white head to the boy. The ill child met him with a gaze that
was astonishingly clear, and for a moment, Arthas felt something inside him stir. Despite everything—
the boy would not die.
 And that meant…
 The boy smiled a little, and some of the sickness dissipated as Arthas struggled for words. “You…
are me. You are both…me. But you…” His voice was soft, tinged with wonder and disbelief. “You are
the little flame that burns inside me still, that resists the ice. You are the last vestiges of humanity—of
compassion, of my ability to love, to grieve…to care. You are my love for Jaina, my love for my father…
for all the things that made me what I once was. Somehow Frostmourne didn’t take it all. I tried to
turn away from you…and I couldn’t. I—can’t.”
 The boy’s sea- green eyes brightened and he gave his other self a tremulous smile. His color
improved, and before Arthas’s eyes, some of the pustules on his skin disappeared.
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 206
 “You understand, now. Despite all, Arthas, you have not abandoned me.” Tears of hope stood in
those eyes and his voice, though stronger now than it had been, quavered with emotion. “There must
be a reason. Arthas Menethil…much harm have you done, but there is goodness in you yet. If there was
none…I would not exist, not even in your dreams.”
 He slipped off the chair and slowly walked toward the death knight. Arthas stood as he
approached. For a moment, they regarded each other, the child and the man he had become.
 The boy extended his arms, as if he were a living, breathing child asking to be picked up and held by
a loving father. “It doesn’t have to be too late,” he said quietly.
 “No,” Arthas said quietly, staring raptly at the boy. “It doesn’t.”
 He touched the curve of the boy’s cheek, slipped a hand beneath the small chin and tilted up the
shining face. He smiled into his own eyes.
 “But it is.”
 Frostmourne descended. The boy cried out, his shocked, betrayed, anguished cry—that of the wind
raging outside—and for a moment Arthas saw him standing there, the blade buried in his chest almost
as big as he was, and felt one final tremor of remorse as he met his own eyes.
 Then the boy was gone. All that remained of him was the bitter keening of the wind scouring the
tormented land.
 It felt…marvelous. It was only with the boy’s passing that Arthas truly realized how dreadful a
burden this last struggling scrap of humanity had been. He felt light, powerful, purged. Scoured clean,
as Azeroth would soon be. All his weakness, his softness, everything that had ever made him hesitate or
second- guess himself—it was all gone, now.
 There was only Arthas, Frostmourne, all but singing at having claimed the final piece of Arthas’s
soul, and the orc, whose skull- face was split with triumphant laughter.
 “Yes!” the orc exhilarated, laughing almost maniacally. “I knew you would make this choice. For so
long you have wrestled with the last dregs of goodness, of humanity in you, but no longer. The boy
held you back, and now you are free.” He now got to his feet, his body still that of an old orc, but
moving with the ease and fluidity of the young.
 “We are one, Arthas. Together, we are the Lich King. No more Ner’zhul, no more Arthas—only
this one glorious being. With my knowledge, we can—”
 His eyes bulged as the sword impaled him.
 Arthas stepped forward, plunging the glittering, hungering Frostmourne ever deeper into the
dream- being that had once been Ner’zhul, then the Lich King, and was soon to be nothing, nothing at
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 207
all. He slipped his other arm around the body, pressing his lips so close to the green ear that the
gesture was almost intimate, as intimate as the act of taking a life always was and always would be.
 “No,” Arthas whispered. “No we. No one tells me what to do. I’ve got everything I need from you—
now the power is mine and mine alone. Now there is only I. I am the Lich King. And I am ready.”
 The orc shuddered in his arms, stunned by the betrayal, and vanished.

 The teacup shattered as it fell from Jaina’s suddenly nerveless hands. She gasped, momentarily
unable to breathe, the cold of the damp, gray day knifing through her. Aegwynn was there, her gnarled
hands closing on Jaina’s.
 “Aegwynn—I—what happened?” Her voice was thick, anguished, and tears suddenly filled her eyes
as if she was grieving terribly for the loss of…something….
 “It’s not your imagination,” Aegwynn said grimly. “I felt it, too. As for what—well, I’m sure we’ll find
out.”

 Sylvanas started as if the mammoth demon in front of her had struck her. Which, of course, he
would never dare do. Varimathras narrowed his glowing eyes.
 “My lady? What is it?”
 Him.
 It was always him.
 Sylvanas’s gloved hands clenched and unclenched. “Something has happened. Something to do
with the Lich King. I—felt it.” There was no longer a link between them, at least not one in which she
was under his control. But perhaps something lingered. Something that warned her.
 “We need to step up our plans,” she told Varimathras. “I believe that time has suddenly become a
precious commodity.”

 For so long, he had felt nothing. He had stayed on the throne, immobile, waiting, dreaming. The
ice had come to cover him as he sat still as stone, but not a prison, no, a second skin.
 He had not known then what he was waiting for, but now he did. He had taken the final steps on a
journey begun so long ago, begun the day that darkness had first brushed his world in the form of a
World of WarCraft: Arthas: Rise of the Lich King
 208
weeping, young Stormwind prince mourning his father. The path had led across Azeroth, to
Northrend, to this Frozen Throne and open sky. To the searching of his deepest self, and the choices
to murder both the innocent that held him back and the parts of himself that had shaped him.
 Arthas, the Lich King, alone in his glory and power, slowly opened his eyes. Ice cracked from them
at the gesture and fell in small shards, like frozen tears. A smile formed beneath the ornate helm that
covered his white hair and pale skin, and more ice fell from his awakening, slowly shifting form,
fragments of an icy chrysalis that was no longer needed. He was awake.
 “It’s begun.”

ONE
 A Clash of Arms
 Asoft, cool breeze blew through the upper branches of the mighty oak trees of the Hearthglen Woods.
A peaceful quiet had fallen over the tranquil forest, leaving Tirion Fordring alone with his thoughts. His
gray stallion, Mirador, trotted at an easy pace along the winding hunting path. Though game had been
strangely scarce for the past few weeks, Tirion came to hunt here whenever the opportunity presented
itself. He preferred the grandeur and crisp air of the open country to the musty, confining halls of his
keep. He had been hunting in these woods since he was a small boy and knew their numerous, winding
trails like the back of his hand. This was the one place he could always find refuge from the burdens and
bureaucratic pressures of his station. He mused that someday he would bring his young son, Taelan, to
hunt with him so that the boy could experience the rugged majesty of his homeland for himself.
 Lord Paladin Tirion Fordring was a powerful man. He was strong in both mind and body, and was
counted as one of the greatest warriors of his day. Though he was slightly over fifty years of age, he still
looked as fit and dynamic as he had when a younger man. His signature bushy mustache and his neatly
trimmed brown hair were streaked with gray, but his piercing green eyes still shone with an energy that
belied his years.
 Tirion was the governor of the prosperous Alliance principality of Hearthglen, a large forested region
nestled at the crossroads between the towering Alterac Mountains and the mist-shrouded shores of
Darrowmere Lake. He was respected as a just governor and his name and deeds were honored
throughout the kingdom of Lordaeron. His great keep, Mardenholde, was the center of commerce and
trade for the bustling region. The citizens of Hearthglen took great pride in the fact that the keep’s mighty
walls had never fallen to invaders, even during the darkest days of the orcish invasion of Lordaeron. Yet,
of late, Tirion was disgruntled to find a different kind of army scurrying worriedly through the halls of his
home.
 In recent weeks the keep had been overrun with traveling dignitaries and representatives from the
various nations of the Alliance, who passed through Hearthglen on their secret diplomatic errands. He
had met with many of them in person, offering his hospitality and assistance wherever he could. Though
the dignitaries were appropriately appreciative of his efforts, Tirion could sense a growing tension within
all of them. He suspected that they were charged with carrying dire news directly to the Alliance High
Council. Try as he might, he could not discern the specifics behind their urgent communiqués. Yet Tirion
Fordring was no fool. After thirty years of serving the Alliance as a Paladin, he recognized that only one
thing could cause the otherwise stoic emissaries to be so troubled: War was returning to Lordaeron.
 
 It had been nearly twelve years since the war against the orcish Horde had ended. It was a terrible
conflict that had raged across the northlands, leaving many of the Alliance kingdoms razed and blackened
in its wake. Too many brave men fell before the rampaging Horde was finally stopped. Tirion had lost a
number of good friends and soldiers over the course of the war. Though the Alliance had rallied at the
eleventh hour and pulled victory from the clutches of certain defeat, it had paid a heavy price. Almost an
entire generation of young men had selflessly given their lives to insure that mankind would never be
slaves to savage orc overlords.
 Near the war’s end, the battered and leaderless orc clans were rounded up and placed within guarded
reserves near the outskirts of the Alliance lands. Though, as a precautionary measure, it was necessary to
police the reserves with full regiments of knights and footmen, the orcs remained docile and passive.
Indeed, as time passed, the orcs seemed to lose their raging bloodlust completely and lapse into a strange
communal stupor. Some supposed that the foul brutes’ lethargy was brought on by inactivity, but Tirion
remained to be convinced. He had seen, firsthand, the orcs’ brutality and savagery in battle. Memories of
their heinous atrocities had plagued his dreams for years after the war. He, for one, would never believe
that their warlike ways had left them completely.
 
 Tirion prayed every night, as he always had, that conflict would never endanger his people again.
Perhaps naively, he hoped fervently that his young son would be spared the rigors and horrors of war. As
a Paladin, he had seen far too many children orphaned or left for dead over the course of the tragic
conflict. He wondered how any child could not become cold and disassociated when faced with terror
and violence all around them. He would certainly never allow that to happen to his own boy, that was
certain. Yet, despite his best wishes, he could not ignore the reality of the present situation. His closest
aides and advisors had been telling him of the grim rumors for months now—that the orcs were once
again on the move. Hard as it was to believe, the presence of so many emissaries in his keep confirmed it
to be true.
 If the orcs were foolish enough to rise up again, he would do whatever it took in order to stop them.
Duty had always been the one constant in his life. He had spent the majority of his years defending
Lordaeron in one way or another. Though he had not been born a noble, his enthusiasm and honor had
won him the rank of knight at the tender age of eighteen. Tirion served his king with undying loyalty and
won a great deal of respect from his superiors. Years later, when the orcs first invaded Lordaeron, intent
on crushing civilization, he was one of the first knights to be given the honor of standing with Uther the
Lightbringer and being anointed as a holy Paladin.
 Uther, Tirion, and a number of devout knights were hand-picked by the Archbishop Alonsus Faol to
become living vessels of the holy Light. Their special, sacred charge was twofold: aided by the holy Light,
the Paladins would not only lead the fight against the vile forces of darkness, but heal the wounds inflicted
upon the innocent citizens of humanity as well. Tirion and his fellows were given the divine power to heal
wounds and cure diseases of every kind. They were imbued with great strength and wisdom that enabled
them to rally their brethren and give glory to the Light. Indeed, the Paladins’ leadership and strength
helped to turn the tide of the war and insure the survival of humanity.
 Though his own Light-given powers had waned somewhat over the years, Tirion could still feel strength
and grace flow through his aging limbs. Surely he would have strength enough when he needed it the
most. For his son and for his people, he would have strength enough, he vowed.
 
 Clearing his head of concerns, Tirion stopped to get his bearings. To his surprise, he found that he’d
wandered much farther up the winding path than he’d intended. The path snaked its way up and over the
densely forested mountain. There were no outposts this far up, Tirion remembered. As a matter of fact,
he couldn’t recall the last time he had ventured up this far. He took a moment to drink in the raw beauty
of the place. He could hear babbling streams nearby and smell the clean, crisp air. The sky was blue and
clear as he watched two falcons circle high above. He truly loved this land. He told himself that he’d
return to this spot when a more opportune moment presented itself. Running his hand through his thinning,
graying hair, he chided himself for becoming so lost in thought. He had come out to hunt, after all. Tirion
deftly turned his mount around on the thin path and spurred Mirador to a quicker pace back down the
mountain. He pulled sharply on the reins and steered his faithful mount into the dense woods.
 After a few minutes he slowed his pace and galloped into a wide clearing that surrounded the ruins of an
abandoned guard tower. He stopped near the old tower’s base and peered up at the lonely structure.
Like many other ruins that dotted the land, it was a painful reminder of a darker time. The tower’s walls
were broken and scarred by blackened blastmarks. Obviously the work of orcish catapults, he thought.
He remembered how the destructive machines had hurled their fiery projectiles from great distances and
devastated entire villages during the war. He wondered how the ruined structure could still be standing
after having been left to the unforgiving elements for so long. While examining the tower’s base he caught
sight of strange tracks upon the ground. He dismounted to inspect them. His blood nearly froze in his
veins as he realized that the oversized tracks had not been made by any man—and that they were fresh.
 Tirion quickly looked around and found more tracks scattered throughout the clearing. He surmised that
orcs had been here within the past few days at least. Could the vile brutes be mobilizing so soon, he
wondered? No. There had to be some other explanation. Hearthglen’s borders were secure. There was
no way that a group of orcs could go undetected in his land for any length of time. Subtlety, of all things,
was definitely not a part of their nature. His scouts and guardsmen would have been alerted to any orcish
incursion into Hearthglen immediately upon their arrival. Yet the fresh tracks were there, just the same.
 
 Tirion walked Mirador around to the back of the tower and drew his heavy bastard sword from the
scabbard attached to his saddle. He wished fervently that he had brought his mighty warhammer instead.
Though he was well-practiced with a blade, he would have preferred to wield his traditional hammer, as
all Paladins did in the face of danger.
 As stealthily as he could, Tirion crept around the tower and entered through what was left of its front
door. A number of large wooden beams had fallen from the rickety ceiling and splintered all over the
chipped stone floor. He inspected the dilapidated guardroom and found a small, makeshift fire pit near a
ragged, patchwork bedroll. The fire in the ash-laden pit had only recently burnt out. Apparently the orcs
had taken up residence within the old tower. Strangely, he saw no weapons or token trophies, which
orcs were fond of collecting. He wondered what could possess the brutes to so recklessly squat on
Alliance-held lands.
 Deciding to return to the keep and gather his men, Tirion exited the tower and strode boldly out into the
clearing. To his surprise, he immediately locked eyes with a gargantuan orc, who had suddenly emerged
from the tree line. The orc, who seemed as startled as Tirion, dropped the bundle of firewood it had been
carrying and reached for the broad battle-ax that was slung to its back. Tirion gritted his teeth and
brandished his own sword threateningly. Slowly, the orc planted his feet firmly on the ground, unslinging
the mighty ax.
 
 It had been years since Tirion had laid eyes on an orc. He looked upon the brute with unabashed awe
and revulsion. Yet, through his surging adrenaline, Tirion noticed that there was something quite different
about this orc. Certainly, the creature was as immense and well-muscled as any other he had beheld. Its
coarse, green skin and ape-like stance marked it as clearly as any other orc. Even its hideous tusks and
pointed ears were reminiscent of every savage that Tirion had faced during the war. But something in the
creature’s stature and demeanor seemed different. There was an aged weight in its stance and far too
many wrinkles around its eyes. Its ratty beard and ritually top-knotted hair bore heavy streaks of gray.
Where most orc warriors adorned themselves with mismatched plates of armor and spiked gauntlets, this
one wore only stitched furs and ruddy leather pants. Its calm lethality and assured, comfortable battle
stance clearly indicated that this orc was no rampaging youngster, but, indeed, a seasoned veteran.
Despite its apparent age, it was potentially more dangerous than any orc Tirion had ever faced.
 The hulking creature stood motionless for a long moment, as if daring Tirion to make the first move.
Tirion quickly surveyed the tree line to make certain there were no other orcs preparing to ambush him.
Peering back at the orc, he found that it had not moved even an inch. The orc nodded as if to confirm
that it was alone. The creature’s knowing gaze left Tirion with the impression that it wanted his full
attention before it engaged him in combat.
 Feeling somewhat unhinged by the orc’s calm demeanor, Tirion lunged forward. The orc easily
sidestepped Tirion’s initial attack and brought his great ax around in a wide arc. Reflexively, Tirion
ducked under the savage strike and rolled into a defensive crouch. Seizing the moment, he thrust his
blade up at the orc’s exposed belly. The creature expertly blocked the thrust with the haft of his ax, and
leapt backward to give himself more room to maneuver. Tirion feinted to his right and then brought his
blade around in a sweeping reverse thrust. Momentarily caught off guard by the clever move, the orc
whirled around in the opposite direction and brought his ax down in a fast overhead swipe, meant to cut
Tirion in two. Tirion rolled out of the way as the ax crashed down only inches from where he had stood.
The two opponents straightened and squared off once more. They stared at one another in surprise.
Tirion had to admit that the orc was as formidable a foe as he had ever faced. The grim smile that passed
over the orc’s bestial face seemed to impart a similar respect for Tirion’s own abilities.
 
 They began to circle one another, each sizing up the other’s strengths and weaknesses. Tirion was again
surprised by the orc’s demeanor and focus. Every other orc he had encountered had rushed forward
with reckless abandon, preferring savagery and brute force to finesse and tactical maneuvering. This orc,
however, demonstrated remarkable skill and self-control.
 For a moment, Tirion wondered whether or not he could actually best the creature. For a split second,
he worried that his tired limbs and reflexes would fail him at a crucial moment. Sporadic thoughts of his
beloved wife and son being left to fend for themselves without him flashed through his mind, weakening
his resolve by a fraction. With a derisive snort, he shook off his doubts and readied his weapon. He had
faced death a hundred times. He had a job to do. He relaxed slightly and reminded himself that his battle
instincts were as sharp as ever. And he had the power of the Light on his side. No matter how impressive
the orc’s fighting prowess might be, it was still a creature of darkness as far as he was concerned—it was
the sworn enemy of humanity, and for that it had to die.
 
 Rushing forward with grim resolve, Tirion slashed at the orc with every ounce of strength he could
muster. The orc was forced to give ground before the Paladin’s furious attack. Tirion pushed the orc
backward until it felt as if his sword arm would burst into flames. The orc managed to block and counter
a number of the Paladin’s thrusts, but was thrown off-balance by an expertly placed strike. Tirion cut a
gaping gash in the orc’s thigh, sending the brute stumbling into the dust. The old orc grunted loudly as it
slammed down onto the packed dirt. Gripping its bloodied leg in pain, the orc attempted to rise again,
clearly expecting Tirion to take advantage of its precarious position. To its obvious surprise, Tirion
backed off and slowly motioned for it to rise. The orc blinked in astonishment.
 Tirion was a Paladin—a Knight of the Silver Hand—and to him, butchering a fallen foe in the midst of
single combat was unquestionably dishonorable. The holy code of his Order demanded that he give the
orc a reprieve. He nodded to the orc in assurance, and once more motioned for him to rise. Gritting his
sharp, yellowed teeth in pain, the orc slowly recovered his ax and got to his feet. They stood there for a
moment, facing each other with eyes locked. The orc straightened slightly and raised his clenched fist to
his heart. A salute, Tirion realized. Now it was Tirion’s turn to blink in disbelief. Certainly no savage orc
had ever saluted him in battle before. He conceded that perhaps there was more to the fierce creature
than he would have guessed. Nevertheless, it was his enemy. He nodded to the orc in understanding and
raised his sword again.
 This time it was the orc who surged forward. Unable to support its great weight upon its wounded leg,
the orc was forced to lunge at the Paladin with short, violent leaps. Wielding its heavy ax with one hand,
the mighty orc slashed wildly at Tirion. The Paladin was hard-pressed to evade the brute’s savage blows,
and was forced back toward the tower’s entrance. Barely dodging a particularly brutal strike, Tirion
crashed into the guardroom through the open doorway. Momentarily stunned, Tirion roared as the
razor-sharp ax bit deep into his left arm. Fighting to keep his head clear from pain, he managed to slash
at the orc’s exposed hand. The surprised orc howled in rage as his ax clattered upon the stone floor.
Tirion moved in, hoping to end the duel as quickly as possible.
 Instantly, the orc grabbed hold of a fallen beam and swung at the advancing Paladin.
 Tirion backed up a pace as the orc swung the beam in a clumsy arc. The beam smashed into the brittle
wall. Dust and loose rock rained down from the high ceiling. The remaining beams creaked and groaned
as the tower’s walls shifted their weight. Tirion continued his attack, cutting the orc’s makeshift weapon
to splinters with every fevered strike. Realizing the desperate nature of its situation, the orc dropped what
was left of the beam and lunged straight at Tirion with its sinewy arms outstretched. Howling in fury, the
massive orc reached out for Tirion’s throat. The Paladin managed to stab the orc once before the full
weight of the creature’s body slammed into his. The two entangled combatants crashed into the
weakened wall as the rickety ceiling finally gave way and collapsed down upon them.
 
 Tirion woke to the sounds of creaking timber and clattering stone. He blinked as thick clouds of dust
settled all around him. All else was black in the shattered guardroom. His body was numb, but he could
feel a great pressure upon his chest. As the dust cleared, he could see that he was pinned under a large,
split beam. His legs, too, were pinned beneath immense chunks of mortar. Frantically, he looked around
for any sign of the orc. He would be defenseless if the creature decided to finish him off. Reaching down,
he grabbed hold of the beam and heaved with all of his remaining strength. The beam toppled to the side
and clattered against the rubble.
 Pain immediately flooded Tirion’s body. His head swam as the open cut on his arm gushed his precious
blood upon the floor. He attempted to lift himself up and felt an acute burst of pain as his broken ribs
ground against one another. His right leg, too, felt like it might be broken beneath the heavy blocks of
mortar. His battered body reeling from agony and exhaustion, Tirion felt as if he would black out. He
could hear the remaining walls of the structure creaking and groaning. The whole tower was going to
collapse. With consciousness rapidly slipping away, Tirion sensed a rustling behind him. Fighting to stay
awake, Tirion barely turned to see the orc’s green, menacing hands reaching out for him. His gasp of
terror was cut short as blackness overtook him.
 TWO
 Unanswered Questions
 Sunlight cascaded down from the open skylight in the cathedral’s vaulted ceiling. Dust motes
spiraled in a lazy dance, blown by the soft wind that wafted through the grandiose hall. Rows of
large, white candles stood before the base of an immense triptych window of stained glass. The
image of a proud, regal warrior was depicted in the window. Thousands of tiny, colored shards of
glass portrayed the man’s broad features and noble bearing. Surrounded by a halo of golden light,
the man held a mighty warhammer in one hand and a large, leatherbound tome in the other. The
inscription on the tome read: “Esarus thar no’Darador”—“By Blood and Honor We Serve.”
 Tirion Fordring looked up toward the colorful image and felt his spirit soar. Kneeling upon an
ornately carved dais, Tirion humbly bowed his head in prayer. To his left, a group of somber men
dressed in flowing white robes stood in attendance. They were clerics—warrior priests—who
hailed from the Northshire region. The pious clerics were present in order to offer Tirion their
support andspiritual guidance, should he require it. To his immediate right, another group stood
in observance, all dressed in heavy suits of highly polished armor. They were the Knights of the
Silver Hand—the Paladins. The shining Paladins were the champions of Lordaeron and the
Alliance. They stood in support of Tirion—the newest initiate to their hallowed ranks. Before him
was a vast altar that lay directly beneath the enormous stained glass window. The streaming
sunlight was focused at the center of the altar, where another robed man sat in meditative silence,
cradling a large book in his lap. Tirion was only vaguely aware of the others gathered in the
cathedral behind him, chatting anxiously while waiting for the ceremony to begin.
 The robed man on the altar raised his hand, calling for the gathered masses to fall silent. Tirion
held his breath. This was the moment for which he had waited. The robed man stood and slowly
walked forward to address the kneeling Tirion. The Archbishop stopped as he reached the ornate
dais and opened the large book he had been holding. With a voice like thunder, the Archbishop
read aloud:
 “In the Light, we gather to empower our brother. In its grace, he will be made anew. In its
power, he shall educate the masses. In its strength, he shall combat the shadow. And, in its
wisdom, he shall lead his brethren to the eternal rewards of paradise.” Finishing the verse, the
Archbishop closed the book and turned toward the men on the left. Tirion felt a rush of
excitement sweep through his body. He breathed in deeply and tried to focus on the solemnity of
the moment.
 “Clerics of the Northshire, if you deem this man worthy, place your blessings upon him,” the
Archbishop said in a ritualistic tone. One of the white-robed men walked forward, carrying an
embroidered dark blue stole in his hands. The Cleric reached the dais and reverently placed the
blessed stole around Tirion’s neck. He dipped his thumb in a small vial of sacred oil and anointed
Tirion’s sweating brow with it.
 “By the grace of the Light, may your brethren be healed,” the Cleric said in a whisper. He bowed
and backed away to stand once more amongst his fellows.
 The Archbishop turned to the men on the right and spoke again: “Knights of the Silver Hand, if
you deem this man worthy, place your blessings upon him.”
 Two of the armored men moved forward with obvious pride on their faces and stood solemnly in
front of the dais. One of the men held a great, two-handed warhammer. The hammer’s silvery
head was etched with holy runes and its haft was meticulously wrapped in blue leather. Tirion
could only marvel at the weapon’s exceptional craftsmanship and beauty. The knight laid the
hammer on the dais before Tirion’s feet. He then bowed his head and backed away. The second
knight, carrying dual ceremonial shoulder plates, stepped forward and looked Tirion in the eye.
He was Saidan Dathrohan, one of Tirion’s closest friends. The knight’s face was alight with pride
and excitement. Tirion smiled knowingly. Visibly composing himself, Saidan placed the silver
shoulder plates upon Tirion’s shoulders and spoke in a stern voice. “By the strength of the Light,
may your enemies be undone.”
 After he finished speaking, Saidan adjusted the silver plates so that the blue stole streamed out
from beneath them. He then backed away and returned to the group of attendant knights. Tirion’s
heart pounded in his chest. He was so overcome with joy that he felt almost light-headed. The
Archbishop strode forward once again and placed his hand upon Tirion’s head.
 “Arise and be recognized,” he said. Tirion got to his feet and marveled at the sheer magnitude of
the honor being bestowed upon him. The Archbishop leveled his gaze at Tirion, then read aloud
from the book.
 “Do you, Tirion Fordring, vow to uphold the honor and codes of the Order of the Silver Hand?”
 “I do,” Tirion replied earnestly.
 “Do you vow to walk in the grace of the Light and spread its wisdom to your fellow man?”
 “I do.”
 “Do you vow to vanquish evil wherever it be found, and protect the weak and innocent with your
very life?”
 Tirion swallowed hard and nodded while saying, “By my blood and honor, I do.” He exhaled
softly, overcome with emotion.
 The Archbishop closed the book and walked back toward the center of the altar.
 Turning to face the entire assembly, the Archbishop said, “Brothers—you who have gathered
here to bear witness—raise your hands and let the Light illuminate this man.” Each of the Clerics
and knights raised their right hands and pointed toward Tirion. To Tirion’s amazement, their
hands began to glow with asoft, golden radiance. He supposed that, in the excitement of the
moment, his eyes were playing tricks on him. Yet, as he watched in wonder, the sunlight that
poured in from above began to move slowly across the floor. As if in response to the assembly’s
command, the light came to rest upon Tirion himself. Partially blinded by the intense radiance,
Tirion felt his body warmed and energized by its holy power. Every fiber of his being was ignited
by divine fire. He could sense life-giving energies flowing through his limbs, energies enough to
heal any wound or cure any disease. He mused that these energies were enough to burn even the
souls of the accursed denizens of the shadow. Despite himself, he shuddered involuntarily.
 Ablaze with hope and joy, Tirion knelt down and took hold of the mighty hammer—the symbol of
his holy appointment and station. With joyous tears streaming down his face, he raised his head
and looked toward the Archbishop, who smiled warmly back at him.
 “Arise, Tirion Fordring—Paladin defender of Lordaeron. Welcome to the Order of the Silver
Hand.”
 The entire assembly erupted in cheers. Trumpets blared from the high balconies and the cheerful
din echoed through the vastness of the Cathedral of Light.
 
 Tirion woke with a start. The sound of children’s frolicking laughter came through the nearby window.
Outside he could hear the familiar sounds of commerce and trade being conducted within the grounds of
Mardenholde keep. He was home, in his own bed. Shaking his head to clear his groggy mind, he
wondered how long he had slept. His sheets were soaked with sweat and he smelled as if he hadn’t
bathed in a week. His head was pounding so hard he felt as if it would burst. Sighing heavily, he
remembered that he had been dreaming. He tried to recall the dream’s details, but due to the incessant
pounding in his skull, he could only grasp the faintest flashes of imagery: a robed man, a shiny hammer,
and a vicious orc.A vicious orc? He surmised that he had dreamt of his appointment as a Paladin. But
surely there were no orcs present at that joyous ceremony. Slowly, more images began to flash in his
mind. There had been a fight between himself and the orc—and he had lost. Nonsense, he thought
absently. He mused that his dreams were becoming even more imaginative in his old age.
 Lifting his head from the sweat-soaked pillow, he attempted to get up and out of bed. A searing pain
shot through him and he lay back down, panting for breath. He stripped the blankets from his body and
saw that his entire midsection had been neatly bandaged. Bruises and small lacerations covered most of
his aching body. He was surprised to find that his arm had also been dressed and bandaged. Frantically,
he tried to recall what had happened to him. Had the fight against the orc been real? For some strange
reason, his memory seemed hazy and sluggish. His face contorted with pain as he struggled out of bed.
Wrapping himself in his dressing robe, he made his way toward the sitting room of his private chambers.
 He found his young wife, Karandra, sitting quietly with her needlework in a large plush chair near an
open window. At seeing him enter the room, Karandra threw down her embroidery and rushed to meet
him. She hugged him warmly, careful not to squeeze him too tightly.
 “Thank the Light, you’re awake,” she said. Her young, delicate features were fixed with both relief and
concern. Her blue eyes seemed to stare straight through him, as they always did. He smiled back and
kissed her forehead lightly. He marveled, for perhaps the ten thousandth time, at her beauty. “I was
beginning to wonder if you were going to sleep clear through midyear,” she said. His eyebrow arched
questioningly as he stroked her soft, golden hair.
 “What do you mean? How long have I slept?” he asked.
 “Nearly four days,” she replied flatly. Tirion blinked in disbelief.
 “Four days,” he mumbled to himself. That would explain the hazy memory, he mused.
 “Karandra, what’s happened to me? Why have I slept so long?” he asked. She shrugged, shaking her
head slightly.
 “We’re not exactly sure what happened to you,” she replied. “You left in the morning to go hunting and
were gone for hours. Since you’re almost never late in returning, I was worried that you’d been hurt. I
sent Arden out to find you.” Tirion smiled. Arden was the captain of the keep’s guards, and perhaps his
most loyal friend. He should have guessed that Arden would go searching for him. Karandra continued,
“Just as he was leaving the keep, he came across you atop Mirador. He said that you were unconscious
when he found you, and that you’d been tied to the saddle with your own reins.”
 Tirion cupped his aching head in his hands. “Tied to my saddle? None of this makes any sense,” he said
wearily.
 She placed her cool hand against his forehead, soothingly. “Your ribs were broken and your arm had
been sliced open. We feared you had been attacked by a rogue bristlebear. Barthilas healed you as soon
as Arden brought you inside.”
 Tirion sat down heavily in her chair.Barthilas? Barthilas had healed him? The youth was only recently
anointed as a Paladin, and Tirion was surprised to hear that his powers had developed so quickly. The
somewhat arrogant but devout Barthilas had been assigned as Tirion’s Second—his successor as Lord
Paladin over Hearthglen. He had tutored the young Paladin in the ways of their holy Order and instructed
him in the protocols of the political arena. Though he was glad the youth had been able to heal him, he
had other matters to ponder.Had the fight with the orc really taken place ?
 Karandra kneeled down, close to him. “Barthilas’ healing taxed you greatly, and left him exhausted. As
you slept, you cried out a number of times in delirium,” she said.
 He looked at her questioningly. “And?” he asked.
 “Well,” she began with a look of concern crossing her face, “you were rambling on about orcs, Tirion.
You said that there were orcs in Hearthglen.”
 He laid back in the chair wearily. The memories of the furious encounter came rushing back at him. The
fighthad been real. He looked into her crystal blue eyes and nodded grimly.
 “Itwas an orc,” he told her. Karandra sat back on her feet, mouth agape.
 “Light save us,” she muttered. Just then the door slammed open and five-year-old Taelan came
bounding into the room.
 “Poppa! Poppa!” the boy shouted, running over to his parents. Karandra straightened and stood up as
Taelan leaped up into Tirion’s lap. Tirion grunted as the small boy threw himself against his sore chest.
 “Taelan, my boy, how are you?” he asked, wrapping his son up in a hearty hug. Taelan beamed a coy
smile up at him and shrugged his shoulders. “Have you been good for your mother?” Taelan nodded
excitedly.
 “He’s mindful often enough,” Arden’s strong voice boomed from the doorway. “But he’s just as
rambunctious as his father ever was.” Karandra smiled warmly at the loyal guardsman as he entered the
room. “I hope I’m not intruding on anything. I saw Taelan there heading this way like a raging ogre and
thought to catch him before he woke you, Tirion. It seems I shouldn’t have worried.” With a grunt, Tirion
rose with Taelan in his arms and walked forward to greet his old friend. The two shook hands heartily.
 “Karandra tells me that I should thank you for hauling me back to the keep. Honestly, Arden, if I had a
gold mark for every time you’ve fished me out of trouble . . .”
 “Nonsense. I just led your horse back. If you thank anyone, it should be Barthilas. He just about burnt
himself out trying to heal you. You’d taken a pretty good beating, old friend. In any case, I’m glad to see
you back amongst the living. You had us concerned there for a while.”
 “I know,” Tirion said. “There are some things we should discuss, immediately.” Arden nodded, casting a
sidelong look at Taelan and Karandra. Catching the captain’s subtle hint, Karandra took Taelan from
Tirion’s arms and said, “I’ll leave you both to it, then. You’ve got plans to make. And this little one needs
to go down for his nap.” She kissed the boy on the cheek. Taelan, whining with displeasure, struggled to
break free of her firm grasp. Karandra laughed softly to herself.
 “Just like his father,” she said with a giggle. Both Tirion and Arden smiled as she left.
 “I’ll see you later, son,” Tirion said, watching them leave. Once they were out of earshot, he turned to
face Arden, his face a mask of concern.
 “It was an orc, Arden. More than likely, it’s still alive. As far as I could tell, it was alone out there. And,
until we know otherwise, I want to keep this between us and whoever else was on hand when you
brought me in. I don’t want to panic the entire province in case this was just a solitary incident.”
 Arden’s strong jaw tightened noticeably. “There may be a problem on that front already, milord.
Barthilas and I were both on hand while you slept. We both heard you mutter about the orc,” he said.
Tirion grimaced as Arden continued. “You know Barthilas as well as I do. Once he heard you say ‘orc,’
he flew into a rage and started calling for a full regiment to scour the countryside in search of any more of
the brutes. I nearly had to sit on him to calm him down.”
 “I appreciate the lad’s enthusiasm, but his fervor could be problematic,” Tirion stated wryly.
 “That would be an understatement,” Arden added, smiling. Both men had recognized early on Barthilas’
almost zealous obsession to face orcs in battle. Barthilas’ parents had been murdered by orcs during the
war, which had left the traumatized youth orphaned and inconsolable. Deciding to spend the rest of his
life combating the orcs’ evil, Barthilas underwent years of rigorous training and study. Yet, tragically, the
fiery youth was accepted as a Paladin only after the war had ended. Despite all his training and
preparation, Barthilas was tortured by the fact that he wouldn’t have the chance to avenge his slaughtered
parents. He also felt that he could only win the respect of his superiors by bloodying his hands gloriously
in battle, as they had during the war. He dreamed of becoming a mighty hero and taking vengeance upon
the creatures that had taken his family from him.
 Although he empathized with the younger Paladin, Tirion knew that that kind of thinking could lead to
disaster. “I doubt he’s been tight-mouthed about my encounter. Especially after he healed my wounds.
How many know about this, Arden?” Tirion asked anxiously.
 “Rumors have been flying all around the keep for the past few days. Personally, I’ve heard just about
everything from an orc raiding party to a full-fledged invasion force waiting to descend upon us. You
know how it is. People are terrified that the Horde will return. And Barthilas, specifically, is terrified that
he won’t get to defeat it singlehandedly if it ever does,” Arden replied. Tirion patted him reassuringly on
the shoulder.
 “Let’s just hope it doesn’t come to that,” Tirion said in earnest. “Assemble my advisors. We’ll discuss
this further in council.” Arden saluted crisply and turned to leave. Tirion cleared his throat. “Arden,” he
said softly. “One last thing . . .” Arden stopped in his tracks and stiffened. “You saw the shape I was in
when you found me?”
 “Yes,” Arden replied.
 “There’s no way I could have tied myself to Mirador and found my way home in that condition.”
 “No, milord. There’s no way.”
 “And you saw no one else out there? No one who could have helped me and led the horse back here?”
 “No, milord. There was no one about. I even went back later to search for tracks. I found nothing.
Someone definitely tied you to your horse. And, for the life of me, I can’t figure out who,” Arden
finished. Tirion nodded and motioned for him to go. Left alone, Tirion pondered on who his anonymous
savior could have been. As far as he knew, the only two people in the woods that morning were himself
and the mysterious old orc. Briefly, Tirion wondered if it was the orc that had saved him. His past
experience with the creatures prompted him to disregard the notion. The bestial creatures had no notion
of honor. From all he had seen of them, he was certain that they would never go out of their way to show
compassion toward another creature, least of all a hated enemy. Still, despite his convictions, Tirion’s
instincts told him that it had been the orc after all.
 
 Candles fluttered in the medium-size council room. At the room’s center sat a large oak table, covered
by an immense map that displayed the lands of Hearthglen down to the most minute detail. Six men were
seated around the table, conversing amongst themselves. At the head of the table sat Tirion, who stared
quietly at the section of map that indicated the woodlands surrounding the ruined tower. Lost in thought,
Tirion was disinterested in his advisors’ idle conversation. He couldn’t tear his mind from the nagging
question—who had saved him and led his horse home? He remembered clearly that the orc had saluted
him when he allowed the creature a reprieve during their combat. Perhaps the brute had some semblance
of honor after all, Tirion mused. No, it had to be a mistake. Orcs were vile and savage. Their kind knew
nothing of civility or compassion, he reminded himself. But still, his heart told him that it was the orc who
had saved him.
 His thoughts were interrupted as the door swung open to admit a tall, slender young man. Resplendent in
his silver plate armor, with a deep green cloak flowing behind him, Barthilas looked every bit the
crusading Paladin. Though he was nearly thirty years younger than Tirion, Barthilas held his oath as a
Knight of the Silver Hand as sacred as the elder Paladin did. As always, Barthilas moved with a fluid
grace, barely even acknowledging the presence of the other men in the room. Brash and somewhat
pompous, Barthilas rarely went out of his way to acknowledge anyone who was not a Light-blessed
Paladin.
 Tirion stood and saluted the younger man as he entered.
 “Greetings, Barthilas. I thank you for your healing. If not for you, I’d have gone on my way to join the
Light,” Tirion said, rubbing his still sore ribs. Although his wounds had healed completely, his body was
still tender. Barthilas shook his head dismissively and returned Tirion’s salute.
 “It was nothing, milord. I did just as you would have done for me if the circumstances had been
reversed,” Barthilas said confidently. “I dearly wish that it had been me facing that orc. If I had, its head
would now adorn the keep’s battlements.” Tirion noticed a few of the advisors exchanging surprised
glances. As was usually the case, the young Paladin’s enthusiasm bordered on impertinence. Tirion
smiled at the young man with practiced patience. “Which, of course,” Barthilas continued, “is not to say
that you couldn’t have defeated the brute yourself, milord.”
 “Well, I’m sure you would have put the fear of the Alliance into it, at least, Barthilas. Just the same, for
the time being, I don’t want any of you discussing this matter with anyone else. I’d rather not rile the
citizenry until we have a better understanding of what we’re dealing with here,” Tirion said.
 Barthilas nearly choked. “Milord, with respect, are you suggesting that we keep silent while the enemy
creeps unhindered through our lands? We must scour the woods immediately! Every second we waste
here could provide the orcs with enough time to—” Tirion cut him off.
 “You are assuming that there are more orcs out there, Barthilas. I was there, and I saw none. I will not
sound the call to arms before we’ve confirmed the facts. This is not the time to start jumping at shadows.
We must remain calm and be vigilant.”
 “Jumping at shadows? An orcish force somehow slips undetected into our lands, one of its members
beats you to a pulp, and you want to remain calm? This is madness!” A few of the advisors gasped at the
young man’s audacity, but Barthilas continued, unabated. “We should mobilize a hunting party right this
instant!”
 Tirion clenched his fists and tried to keep his voice even. The advisors, who had kept silent during their
heated exchange, seemed incensed by Barthilas’ disrespectful rantings.
 “You’ll watch your tone with me, boy. I am still governor of this province, and your direct superior as a
Paladin. For so long as I am, we will do things the wayI see fit. You are to stand down and remain within
the keep’s grounds until I order you to do otherwise. Is that clear?” Tirion growled.
 Barthilas was beside himself with rage. “I hope and pray to the Light that milord isn’t so shaken by his
recent beating that he fears to do his clear duty.”
 “That will beenough, Barthilas! You’ve gone too far!” one of the councilor’s shouted. Bristling with
anger, Tirion stepped up to the young Paladin and looked him dead in the eye.
 “You may leave my council room now,” he said to Barthilas.
 The young Paladin choked back his rage and steadied himself. He calmed visibly. “Of course, milord,”
he said in a strained voice. “I will await your orders eagerly.” With that he snapped a crisp salute and left
the room.
 “Yes, I’m sure you will,” Tirion said grimly. Everyone seemed to sigh as the tension drained from the
room. Tirion rubbed his eyes wearily and sat back down.
 One of the advisors spoke. “Milord, he is brash, but he is a good man at heart. I’m sure he didn’t
mean—”
 “I know what he is. And I know what he meant. Barthilas has always been ruled by his passions.
They’re what make him an exceptional Paladin. However, they also make him a liability in delicate
situations,” Tirion stated. He felt tired, like an old man. “Once he calms down, he’ll come around. He
always does.”
 “But milord, what if he’s right? What if there are more orcs out there waiting to strike at us, and we sit
here and do nothing?” the advisor asked.
 Tirion ran his fingers over the spot on the map that indicated the broken tower. “Under no circumstances
will I donothing, old friend. I’ll take care of this matter myself.” Before they had a chance to argue the
point further, he rose and walked toward the exit, leaving the advisors to stare at one another in
confusion. “But on the off chance that he is right . . . may the Light help us all.”
 Later that evening, Tirion sat alone in the keep’s spacious dining hall. His plate of food had gone cold,
and he picked at it absently with his fork. He was thinking about the old orc again. Was it truly possible
that the orc had saved his life? He would have to find out soon. If Barthilas was right, then everything
he’d worked for could come crashing down at any moment.
 Behind him he heard a quiet scuffling of small feet. Looking around, he saw sleepy-eyed Taelan
emerging from the adjoining sitting room.
 “Shouldn’t you be asleep, young man?” he asked. The boy crawled into his lap and looked up at him in
awe. Tirion smiled at his son, thinking how much the boy resembled his mother. Sandy blond hair. Big
blue eyes. He was certainly a sweet, innocent child, Tirion thought.
 “Did the green men come back again, Poppa?” Taelan asked. Tirion nodded and ruffled the boy’s hair.
 “Yes. But you don’t need to worry, son. You’ll be safe enough here in the keep.”
 “Are you going to fight the green men, Poppa?” the boy asked. Tirion’s brow creased.
 “I don’t know yet, son. I just don’t know.”
 THREE
 A Warrior’s Tale
 Tirion woke early the next morning. Slipping out of bed so as not to wake Karandra, he dressed and
made his way down to his personal ready room. There, displayed upon an ornate stand near the
darkened room’s center, was his armor. The heavy silver plates with their gold lining shone brightly in the
early morning light, despite the numerous gouges and dents that covered them.Scars of battle, he thought
warily. Any one of the deep gouges could have signified a fatal wound, had he been a less cautious man
over the years. He hoped silently that his luck would hold out with whatever troubles were coming.
 As quietly as he could, he slipped the armor plates on one at a time and buckled them into place. Once
finished, he stood in front of a full-length mirror and looked himself over. He looked much the same as he
always had, despite a few more gray hairs framing his tired face. He marveled at how well the heavy suit
still fit after all these years. He had to admit to feeling a certain indestructibility every time he wore the
armor. Yet that was a young man’s notion. No one was invincible.No one lived forever, he thought
grimly.
 Walking over to the stone fireplace set into the far wall, Tirion reached out for his trusty warhammer,
which rested on the oak mantel above. The expertly weighted hammer felt good in his hands. The holy
runes etched in its head shone as brightly as they ever had.
 “With any luck, I won’t need your strength today, old friend,” he muttered. He tucked the hammer under
his arm and strode down toward the keep’s stables.
 
 The sun was just breaking over the distant Alterac peaks as Tirion finished saddling Mirador. He slung
the hammer into its saddle-hoop and made ready to mount the seasoned warhorse. He put his foot in the
stirrup and grunted in pain. His ribs still ached, and the heavy armor made it difficult for him to pull his
own weight up.
 “May I ask what you’re doing?” a suspicious voice asked from the stable’s dark entryway. Tirion took
his foot from the stirrup and turned to face Arden. The captain of the guard’s face was stern and etched
with concern.
 “I am going to investigate the tower’s ruins. If the orcs are planning an invasion of my land, then I’ll find
proof of it myself,” Tirion said flatly.
 Arden nodded. “Great. Then I’ll saddle up and go with you.”
 “I do not wish to have company. This is something I must do alone, Arden,” Tirion said. There was iron
in his voice, and the captain’s concern grew more apparent.
 “I don’t like this, Tirion. What exactly are you trying to prove? Heading off unescorted so soon after
your—”
 Tirion cut him off. “My what, Arden? My defeat?” Tirion asked heatedly. Arden lowered his gaze and
shifted uncomfortably. Tirion mounted the horse, exhaled deeply, and curtly said, “I’ll be back in a few
hours. Try to keep an eye on Barthilas while I’m gone. I have a feeling he’ll try to stir up trouble.” He dug
his spurs into Mirador’s sides and sped out toward the distant tree line.
 With growing unease, Arden watched his lord gallop away into the distance. Somehow he knew that
Tirion wasn’t telling him everything.
 
 Finding his way back to the ruined tower wasn’t as easy a task as Tirion had thought it would be. It took
him hours to wind his way back up the mountain trail. The morning fog still clung to the ground along the
winding path, but he could still make out the tower’s broken frame through the trees. As he neared it, he
slowed to an easy canter, attuned to any sounds of danger.This is not a wise move, he
thought—approaching his enemy’s encampment without so much as a squire to aid him. His horse’s
heavy barding and his own flashing armor were enough to announce his presence to anyone for miles
around.Need to be more cautious, he thought. After all, there was still a good chance that the orc had
not been alone when he encountered it. Yet something in his gut told him that this was not the case.
Something deep inside told him that he had nothing to fear. Throwing caution to the wind, Tirion rode
boldly up to the tower’s base and dismounted. Looking up, he could see where the once mighty walls
had collapsed inward. The structural damage to the tower was extensive, and he wondered fleetingly
how he could have survived the disaster at all. He looked about the place for any sign of the orc. He saw
none. The tower looked deserted.
 A low, guttural grunt caught his attention and he turned to see the orc sitting on a large rock near the tree
line. The creature seemed calm and poised, but its great battle-ax leaned nearby within easy reach.So the
creature, too, was cautious, Tirion thought to himself. The proud Paladin removed his helmet and set it
on the pommel of Mirador’s saddle. The great horse snorted loudly, sensing its master’s tension. From
the corner of his eye, Tirion caught sight of the warhammer strapped to the saddle and reached for its
handle. Immediately, the orc grabbed for his ax. Tirion quickly pulled his hand away and took a step
back from the horse. The orc grunted softly and relaxed. It grinned at him knowingly. Tirion took a deep
breath and then walked slowly toward the orc.
 As he walked forward, he realized that he could have been sorely mistaken about the old orc. Perhaps
the creature did intend to kill him after all. Maybe someone else had miraculously saved him from the
tower’s wreckage. Maybe. But he had to know for sure, one way or another. Stopping only a few paces
from where the orc sat, Tirion raised his fist to his heart in salute.That had been the orc’s salute, right?
In return, the orc raised a stiff hand to his own grizzled brow.
 “That is how you humans do it, is it not?” the orc asked in fluid speech. Its voice was deep and gritty,
but its articulation was exceptional. Tirion was dumbfounded, his shock evident on his face. The orc’s
hideous features contorted in what Tirion surmised was a grin.
 “You . . . you speak our language?” Tirion asked shakily.
 The old orc eyed him sternly. “Do you think my people survived in your world this long using brute
strength alone?” it asked. “Your kind has always underestimated mine. That is why you lost the first war,
I think.”
 Tirion could only marvel at the creature. Here sat a thing of darkness—a vile, murdering beast. And yet,
it spoke with fluidity and wit. This creature did not rush to tear out his heart, as he would have expected.
It merely sat, reading him with its clever, knowing eyes. Tirion shuddered, feeling fascinated and repulsed
at the same time. Without thinking, he blurted out the question he had been asking himself ceaselessly: “I
must know. Did you pull me from the tower and lead my horse back to the road?”
 The old orc held him in his gaze for a long while and then nodded once. “I did,” it said.
 Tirion exhaled sharply. “Why would you do that?” he asked. “We are sworn enemies.”
 The orc seemed to consider the point for a moment. “You have great honor, for a human. That much
was clear from our fight. No honorable warrior deserves to die like a trapped animal. It would not have
been right to simply leave you there,” the orc finished. Tirion didn’t know exactly what he had expected
to hear, but he was clearly unprepared for that answer. “Besides,” the orc continued, “I have seen
enough death in my time.”
 Tirion bowed his head, struggling to make sense of the orc’s words.This can’t be right, he thought.
This creature is a merciless savage. How could it speak so? Yet Tirion knew that the orc’s words rang
true. He could feel the orc’s sincerity—and beneath it, deeply buried pain and sorrow. As a Paladin, he
had developed a certain empathic ability to sense deep emotions from others. The curious ability had
never proven to be more useful. He pulled himself together and simply went with the moment.
 “I should thank you, then,” Tirion began, wondering how to properly address the creature.
 Sensing Tirion’s confusion, the orc spoke. “I am Eitrigg, human. You may call me Eitrigg.” Relieved,
Tirion replied, “Thank you, Eitrigg. Thank you for saving my life.”
 The orc nodded again and stood up. Tirion noticed that the orc walked with a distinct limp. He surmised
that the cut he had given the creature during their battle was likely infected. Without giving Tirion a
second glance, the orc limped over toward the ruined tower.
 “I am Tirion Fordring,” the Paladin began. “I should tell you that I am the lord of this land, Eitrigg, and
that your presence here upsets many of those whom I entrust with its protection.”
 The orc laughed softly. “I wager they slept well enough before you found me,” the orc said. “I have lived
here in these woods for many long years, human. I move from place to place, keeping hidden, finding
shelter where I can. I have made great sport of evading your scouts and yourRangers. ”
 The latter was spoken with distinct scorn. Orcs were not known for their fondness of elven Rangers.
The cunning, forest-running Rangers had sworn to gain vengeance against the Horde after the orcs had
destroyed the elves’ enchanted homeland of Quel’Thalas. Tirion wondered if Eitrigg was telling the truth.
Could this orc have remained undetected for so long?
 Eitrigg snorted and said, “It was bad luck that led you to me.”
 “Perhaps,” Tirion began, “but your being here creates a serious problem for me. My people hate your
kind, Eitrigg. Your race brought nothing but misery and chaos to these lands. They would kill you in a
heartbeat if they could. How, then, can I be merciful? How can I let you stay, knowing what your people
have done?”
 “I have abandoned them, human! I live here in solitude—in exile,” Eitrigg said warily. “I no longer wish
to pay for their sins.”
 “I don’t understand,” the Paladin replied. “Are you saying that you’ve disavowed your own people?”
 My people are lost!” the orc spat. “Truth be told, they were lost long before they ever came to this
strange world. When the Horde finally fell before your standards, I decided to take my leave of it
forever.”
 Eitrigg reached down and rolled a large chunk of mortar onto its side. Tirion was impressed with the
orc’s strength. It would have taken at least two stout men to move the stone. The orc motioned for Tirion
to sit and then sat himself down cross-legged on the ground. Tirion took a seat on the leveled mortar.
 “There is much you do not know about my people. Their honor and their pride left them long ago. I
decided my duty to them was finished when my sons were killed,” Eitrigg said grimly.
 “Were your sons warriors?” Tirion asked. Eitrigg scoffed loudly.
 “All orcs are warriors, human,” he said, as if Tirion were a brainless child. “We know little else. Despite
my sons’ strength and prowess, they were betrayed by their own leaders. During the last war our clan
Chieftains fought amongst themselves over petty rivalries. As one particularly bloody battle concluded,
my sons were ordered to pull back from the front lines. One of our Chieftain’s rivals, hoping to advance
his clan’s standing within the Horde, countermanded the order and sent my sons and their brethren back
to be slaughtered. It was a dark day for our clan. . . .” Eitrigg said, lost in thought. “A dark day for me,”
he finished.
 Tirion’s mind reeled. He was well aware of the fact that orcs frequently fought amongst themselves. Yet
Eitrigg’s apparent grief moved him. He never imagined that such treachery could affect an orc so.
 “I realized then that there was no hope. Corruption and enmity had completely overshadowed my
people’s spirit. I felt that it was only a matter of time before the Horde devoured itself from within,”
Eitrigg said.
 “Where did the corruption come from, Eitrigg? What drove your people to such depravity?” Tirion
asked.
 Eitrigg’s brow raised and he appeared to be deep in thought. “In my grandfather’s time, my people were
simple and proud. There were a few dozen clans then. They lived and hunted within the wilds of our
world. They were all hunters back then—mighty warriors who lived by an honorable code and
worshiped the spirits of the elements themselves. Thunder and lightning coursed through the blood of my
ancestors!” Eitrigg said proudly, lost in the haze of reverie. “Wise Shamans guided them and kept the
peace between the clans.”
 Tirion leaned in, hanging on the old orc’s words. Surely, no human ears had ever heard this much of the
orcs’ history before. “And then?” Tirion asked anxiously. He wondered if this was how Taelan felt, as he
read the boy stories before his bedtime. Eitrigg continued somberly.
 “A new order rose up amongst the clans, promising to unite them and forge them into a powerful nation.
Many of the Shamans discarded their ancient traditions and began to practice dark magics. They began
to call themselves Warlocks. For some malign purpose, they used their shadowy powers to corrupt the
clans and drive them to heinous acts of violence. They did succeed in uniting my people, after a fashion,”
Eitrigg stated wryly. “Under the Warlocks’ rule, the clanswere united—as a rampaging Horde. Our
noble warrior traditions were perverted to serve their dark, secretive ends. It was the Warlocks who
brought my people to your world, human. It was they who drove us to make war against you.”
 Tirion shook his head in bewilderment. “And no one spoke out against them? Out of an entire race of
warriors, no one was willing to fight them?” Tirion asked heatedly.
 “There were a few who would not submit. One of the dissident clans, led by an orc named Durotan,
challenged the Warlocks openly and tried to convince the other clans of their folly. I remember the mighty
Durotan well. He was a great hero. Unfortunately, few orcs heeded Durotan’s warnings. The Warlocks’
hold over their hearts blinded them to reason. For his courage, Durotan was exiled, along with his clan. I
heard that the Warlocks’ assassins finally killed him, years later. Such is the way of the Horde,” Eitrigg
finished. “Madness,” Tirion said. “If your people truly valued honor, as you’ve said, then I can’t believe
that they’d let themselves be controlled so easily.”
 Eitrigg scowled and sat silently for a moment. He looked up with stern eyes and replied, “It was a
terrible momentum that gripped us in those days, human. After Durotan was taken away, fear and
paranoia overtook my people. None would stand against the Warlocks.”
 Tirion scoffed derisively.
 Bristling with anger, Eitrigg erupted. “Have you ever stood against the will of an entire nation, human?
Have you ever questioned an order, knowing that to disobey meant immediate death?”
 Tirion looked away.No. He could scarcely imagine what that must have been like.
 Eitrigg nodded, feeling his point had been made. “It was rumored that the Warlocks consorted with
demons and drew on their infernal powers. Personally, I believe it to be true. The darkness that took
hold of my people could not have been born in our hearts.”
 Tirion tensed. He remembered hearing that the orcs had set demons loose to sow terror throughout the
human ranks. The very thought appalled him. “It seems your people have suffered greatly, Eitrigg, even
before they roused the wrath of mine,” Tirion said with a note of pride in his voice. Eitrigg gave him a
sidelong glance. “However, your story is a remarkable one. I fear I may have misjudged you and your
people along many lines.”
 Eitrigg grunted as if amused and stood up to stretch his back. “Actually,” Tirion continued, “we are much
alike, you and I. We are both old soldiers who have sacrificed much for our—”
 Eitrigg cut him off with a wave of his sinewy hand. “We arenothing alike, human,” he growled. “I am a
renegade living as an exile in a hostile land! You are a wealthy lord, loved by a free people, able to live
life as you wish. We are nothing alike!” Embarrassed by his outburst, the old orc scowled and looked
away into the distance.
 Tirion considered the orc’s harsh words for a moment. “You are right, of course. Our people are at war.
Thus, I must ask you, Eitrigg, on your honor—are there any other orcs in my land? Does the Horde plan
to attack this region?”
 Eitrigg sighed heavily and sat back down. He shook his head in dismay and looked Tirion in the eye. “As
I have told you, human, I live here alone. I have no interest in dealing with others of my kind. I haven’t
even seen another orc in years. I cannot tell you what the Horde plans now. I can only assure you that
this broken old warrior has no plans to assault your keep or make any trouble for you whatsoever. I just
want to be left alone to live out my remaining years in solitude. After a lifetime of fruitless war, peace is
the only comfort I have left.”
 Tirion nodded. “As a warrior of honor, I accept your words, Eitrigg. And, in return for having saved my
life, I will allow you your solitude. So long as you remain hidden and leave my people unmolested, you
may stay here for as long as you wish.”
 Eitrigg smirked slightly in disbelief. “I think perhaps your brethren will hunt me down despite you, human.
To them, I am the sum of their fears,” the old orc said.
 “Yet I am their lord, Eitrigg. They shall do as I say. I give you my solemn oath as a Light-sworn Paladin
that your secret will be safe. None shall hunt you while I have power to prevent it,” Tirion vowed. For a
brief moment, Tirion regretted making such a bold statement. He knew it would be extremely difficult to
fulfill his charge if matters became complicated. If his comrades ever found out that he had made such a
pact, they would certainly brand him as a traitor. However, his instincts told him that this was the right
decision. He stood, resolved.
 Eitrigg grunted in satisfaction. “On your honor, then,” he said, rising to his feet once more. Tirion noticed
the orc’s limp again. Eitrigg was obviously in great pain.
 “On my honor,” Tirion replied, gazing at the orc’s wounded leg. “You know, Eitrigg, I can heal your
wound. It is a power I have,” he said.
 The orc chuckled in amusement. “Thank you, but it’s not necessary,” Eitrigg stated. “Pain is a great
teacher. Apparently, even after all my battles, I still have much to learn.”
 Tirion laughed out loud. He was truly beginning to like the old orc who, not an hour before, he
considered to be the most heinous villain. “Perhaps someday I can return and converse with you further. I
must admit you are not at all what I expected to find,” the Paladin chided.
 Eitrigg’s massive, yellowed tusks seemed to stretch as he smiled. “Nor are you what I expected,
human.”
 Tirion gave the orc’s salute again and mounted Mirador with a grunt. He dug his spurs into the stallion’s
flank and rode off beyond the orc’s sight.
 
 A thousand different thoughts flooded Tirion’s mind as he rode home along the winding path. He
wondered if he had made a mistake by offering the orc sanctuary in his lands. Nevertheless, he had given
his word that he would keep the orc’s secret safe. Whatever else happened, he was honor-bound to
protect the old orc from persecution, and that was that.
 It was nearly dusk as he rode back into the keep’s stables. Tiredly, Tirion handed his reins to the stable
boy and headed inside. All he wanted was to sleep and clear the day’s business from his mind. As he
reached for the door handle that led into the kitchens, a strong hand caught his arm. Tirion looked up to
find Barthilas blocking his way. There was a light in the youth’s eyes that made Tirion very uneasy.
 “Milord,” Barthilas began icily, “we must talk immediately.”
 Tirion sighed in frustration. “I’m very tired, Barthilas. We can talk in the morning if you wish.”
 Barthilas’ grip only tightened. “I don’t think you understand, milord. You see, I know where you were
today,” the young Paladin stated. His eyes never blinked, but held Tirion in their frosty depths. Tirion
wondered if Arden had betrayed him and told of his errand. No. Arden had always been loyal.
 “I know that you know there are orcs in Hearthglen, Tirion. I can see it in your eyes. I pray, for your
sake, that you’re not covering up any pertinent information.”
 Tirion bristled. He could handle the youth’s arrogance, but he would not be threatened in his own home
by an overly zealous boy.
 “I told you before, Barthilas. You will address me with the proper respect,” Tirion stated furiously. “As
for your concerns, I have determined that my encounter was an isolated incident. That’s all you need to
know for the time being. I suggest that you forget about this business and let the matter drop. Now take
your hand away and let me pass before I lose my temper.”
 Slowly, Barthilas released his grip and took a step back. His piercing eyes never left Tirion’s. The elder
Paladin turned brusquely and entered the keep.
 Left standing alone, Barthilas scowled in frustration.
 “This is not over, milord,” the young Paladin hissed to himself, clenching his fists. “This is not over by
far.”
 
 Tirion made his way to his private chambers. He ceremoniously removed his armor and placed his
warhammer back upon the mantel. He entered his bedroom and crashed down heavily on the bed. All he
wanted in the world was just a few hours of sleep. Just as his head hit the plush pillow, Karandra walked
into the room. She was surprised to find him there.
 “Oh, you’re home,” she said sweetly. “Where did you go running off to this morning, Tirion? I asked
Arden, but he wouldn’t tell me anything.” Her voice was full of concern.
 Tirion tensed. He didn’t want to discuss the matter about the orc at all. He had given his word to keep
Eitrigg’s secret safe, and the last thing he wanted was to be forced to lie to his wife about his activities.
But, looking into her eyes, Tirion could tell she wasn’t going to settle for anything less than the whole
story.
 “I went out to inspect the site where I fought the orc, Karandra. I needed to find out if there were more
orcs in my lands,” he said, a tad too irritably. “I wanted to go alone, so I told Arden not to speak about it
with anyone.”
 Karandra frowned and folded her arms under her breasts. She did that every time she was upset with
him.
 “You went off alone only days after your attack? How can you be so reckless, Tirion? What were you
trying to prove? It’s not like you’re a young man anymore!” she said heatedly.
 Tirion flinched. First Barthilas and now his wife. “I’ve been soldiering for more years than you’ve been
alive, girl! The last thing I need from you is a lecture on how to perform my duties properly!” he growled.
 Tirion rarely spoke to her like that, and Karandra never really knew how to respond when he did. She
decided that a tactical change of subject was needed in order to salvage the conversation.
 “Did you find what you were looking for?” she asked, trying to make her voice sound as innocent as
possible.
 Tirion forced himself to calm down, but knew that this new line of questioning wouldn’t fare well for her
either. “Yes, I did,” he said in an even tone. “I am convinced that my encounter was an isolated event,
and that we have nothing to fear from the orcs.”
 Karandra brightened and sat down beside him on the bed. She took his hand in hers. “I’m so relieved.
That’s wonderful, Tirion, but how can you be so sure?” she asked.
 Tirion’s heart sank. He would not lie to her. “I can’t tell you, my love,” he said softly.
 “Why not? If there is nothing to fear, as you say, then there shouldn’t be any problem with telling me,
should there?” she asked. Something in her voice sounded hurt.
 “It is a matter of honor, Karandra. I cannot tell you,” he repeated.
 With a start, Karandra ripped her hand away and stood up from the bed. Tirion half expected lightning
bolts to burst forth from her eyes.
 “Honor. It always comes down to that with you, Tirion! You’re just as exasperating as that vainglorious
Barthilas! Is your precious honor really more important to you than your own wife?” She cupped her face
with her hands and seemed to be on the verge of tears. Tirion looked up at her and answered as gently
as he could.
 “You wouldn’t understand, my love. I am a Paladin. There is a great deal expected of me. . . .” he said,
his voice trailing off. There was an uncharacteristic note of self-pity in his tone.
 Karandra took her hands from her face and had to restrain herself from hitting him.
 “You’re right, I don’t understand! But I know exactly what’s expected of you,” she yelled as tears
started flowing down her reddening cheeks. “You’re expected to act like my husband and not try to
shelter me from your silly little secrets like I’m still a girl in pigtails! You’re expected to act like a
responsible lord and not go gallivanting off alone and putting yourself in danger!” Tirion looked away as
she began to sob. “You’re supposed to be careful and stay alive so that our son doesn’t grow up without
a father,” she finished.
 Tirion stood up and took her in his arms. “I know, dearest. I did take an unnecessary risk. But you’ve
got to trust me on this, Karandra. Everything will be all right,” he told her soothingly.
 She wiped the tears from her eyes and looked at her husband’s face. She would try to trust his
judgment. She was about to tell him as much when a quiet shuffling of feet announced that Taelan had
entered the room. Tirion and Karandra looked toward the door to see their bleary-eyed son standing
before them. Apparently, their arguing had woken the boy up.
 “Are you two fighting?” the boy asked timidly, his big blue eyes glistening with concern.
 Tirion walked over and scooped the boy up in his arms. “No, son, your mother’s just worried about the
orcs, is all,” he said soothingly.
 Taelan seemed to think for a moment. “Poppa, are the orcs as mean and cruel as everyone says they
are?” the boy asked.
 Tirion wasn’t prepared for such a direct question. He thought about his revealing conversation with
Eitrigg, and marveled that he wasn’t so sure anymore. He certainly didn’t want to lie to his son.There
had to be some hope for future generations.
 “Well, son, that’s hard to answer,” he said slowly. Focused on Taelan as he was, Tirion didn’t see
Karandra’s incredulous stare. The boy listened intently as his father continued. “I think there are some
orcs who can be good. They’re just harder to find, is all,” Tirion said gently.
 Karandra couldn’t believe her ears. Her ebbing anger flooded back into her.
 “Really, Poppa?” Taelan asked.
 “I think so,” Tirion replied. “Sometimes we need to be careful of how quickly we judge people, son.”
 The boy seemed pleased with the answer. Karandra was not. Despite everything else, she would be
damned if she let Tirion fill the boy’s head with such nonsense.
 “Don’t tell him that!” she hissed. “Orcs are mindless beasts who should all be hunted down and killed!
How can you even say that, knowing what they’ve done to our world! What’s gotten into you, Tirion?”
she yelled, snatching Taelan from his arms. Sensing her anger, the boy began to cry. She stroked his hair
lovingly as she turned to leave. “Don’t worry, baby,” she said, “your father’s just tired. We’ll let him get
some rest, all right?” she said as she left the room briskly without even turning to acknowledge Tirion.
 Left alone, Tirion wandered over to an ornate serving stand and poured himself a cup of chilled wine.
Taking a deep sip, he sat down heavily and marveled at how quickly his entire world had turned upside
down.
 FOUR
 The Chains of Command
 Two days passed by quietly in Hearthglen. The rumors of the supposed orcish threat had died down
significantly. Tirion felt relaxed, and mused that he might even be able to put the whole matter behind him
for good. So long as Eitrigg stayed away from people, Tirion wouldn’t have to worry about taking action
and betraying his oath to the old orc. He was surprised to find that Barthilas had remained quiet about the
issue for the past few days. Yet, despite the young Paladin’s silence, Tirion sensed that Barthilas
wouldn’t rest so long as he suspected there were orcs in Hearthglen.
 After his unexpected hiatus, Tirion slipped back into his role as the lands’ governor with relative ease.
The somewhat monotonous bureaucratic duties of his office served to keep his mind off of Eitrigg and
their fateful encounter. He spent what private time he could find with Taelan and Karandra. Surprisingly,
his wife seemed to have forgotten about their argument from the previous night. She acted as cheerful as
she always had, and never once broached the subject of orcs again. Tirion was thankful for the peace
and quiet. After the past week, he had had his fill of excitement and danger.
 
 The sun was centered in the crystal blue sky as Tirion sat on a large balcony overlooking the keep’s
stables and riding corral. Located at the rear of the keep’s grounds, the balcony offered a breathtaking
view of the mighty snow-capped Alterac peaks in the distance. He watched as, far below him in the
corral, Karandra led a small, white pony around in circles. Upon the pony’s back sat Taelan, who was
clearly having the time of his life. The laughing boy flailed his tiny arms gleefully, calling for his mother to
go faster and faster. Karandra laughed with her son, and kept reminding him to hold onto the pony’s
mane with both hands.
 Tirion gazed at them both intently. They were the center of his world and the source of all his joy. He
would not fail them. He had thought long and hard about what Karandra had said to him during their
heated argument. Perhaps his honor was a selfish thing after all, he mused. But even if it was, it was an
integral part of him. It defined him as clearly as his own face did. As a Paladin he could not and would
not discard it out of hand. All depended on it. He simply hoped that it would never come between him
and his loved ones again.
 
 Arden’s heavy boots clanked loudly upon the balcony’s stone floor. The captain of the guard strode up
behind Tirion and bowed curtly. Tirion noticed that Arden was winded. Apparently, the loyal captain had
rushed to find him. Tirion stood up and saluted the younger man. He saw that Arden’s face was drawn
and pale.
 “What is it, Arden? Why are you in such a hurry?”
 The captain struggled to catch his breath. “I’ve been looking all over for you, milord,” Arden said in a
raspy tone. “We have visitors at the gate.” Tirion tensed. For a brief moment, he feared the worst.
Certainly, visitors to the keep were common enough. The only thing Tirion imagined that would affect
Arden so was an army of orcs scaling the walls.
 “What visitors? Is there some problem?” the Paladin asked tightly.
 Arden shook his head and gulped air. “An envoy from Stratholme, milord. Lord Commander Dathrohan
has come in person, escorted by a full regiment. He wishes to speak to you immediately.”
 Tirion’s jaw dropped.Lord Dathrohan, here? he wondered. The Lord Commander was not only his
direct superior, but one of his oldest friends as well. Dathrohan was a great leader and an honorable
warrior. He and Tirion had saved each other’s lives more than once during the war. Due to their
increasing duties, the two friends hadn’t seen each other in years. But why would the great lord venture
all the way from the province’s capital for an unannounced visit escorted by so large a force? A burst of
panic surged through Tirion’s body.Dathrohan knew about the orc. It was the only explanation for his
visit, Tirion concluded. He knew that it must have been Barthilas who had alerted the Lord Commander
to his recent encounter with Eitrigg. Tirion inhaled deeply and steadied himself. He patted Arden
reassuringly on the shoulder and, with a sidelong glance at his wife and son below, strode out toward the
main gate.
 
 Lord Commander Saidan Dathrohan was an imposing figure. He stood nearly six and a half feet tall and
was resplendent in his ornate, shining armor. A gold-rimmed, midnight-blue cloak covered his broad
shoulders and flowed out regally behind him. His aged features were marked by long years of battle and
strife. His evenly cropped hair and neatly trimmed beard were gray, but his piercing blue eyes shone with
a vigor and strength that belied his years.
 Upon seeing Tirion approach, Dathrohan’s stern countenance broke and he smiled widely. He strode
forward and embraced his friend in a bear hug. Tirion felt the air escape from his lungs. The mighty
Dathrohan nearly lifted him from the floor. Dathrohan let out a deep, barrel-chested laugh.
 “Tirion, my friend, it’s good to see you. How long has it been, four years?” Dathrohan asked. He
released Tirion and the Paladin straightened formally.
 “Almost four years exactly, milord,” Tirion replied.
 Dathrohan smirked and slapped his back, nearly sending Tirion stumbling. “Let’s not start with all that
‘my lord’ rubbish! You’re one of the few men alive who still remembers me as a snot-nosed whelp.
We’re on even ground here, you and I,” Dathrohan said humorously. Tirion forced himself to relax and
smiled back.
 “Have it your way then,Saidan. ” He slapped his hand on the taller man’s shoulder plate. “It’s good to
see you, too,” he said warmly. Though Dathrohan’s demeanor was as familiar and raucous as it had ever
been, there was a light of concern in his sharp eyes. Tirion looked past his friend and saw row upon row
of armored footmen standing on the plain beyond the keep’s walls. His heart sank. Although he was glad
to see his friend, Tirion knew that the presence of so many soldiers meant trouble.
 “Tell me, Saidan, why didn’t you inform me of your journey? I could have prepared a great feast, had I
known you were coming,” Tirion said, trying to keep his voice open and friendly.
 Dathrohan nodded and spread his hands wide. “I apologize for the intrusion, Tirion, but we have urgent
business to conduct. I felt I had to come and see you as soon as possible. But let’s leave our business
until later. You need time to gather your advisors for a meeting,” he said in a more somber tone.
 “Is there trouble, Saidan? Are we going to war?” Tirion asked, not knowing what else to say. Dathrohan
held him in his piercing gaze, studying his features.
 “That’s what I’m here to find out, Tirion,” he said at last.He doesknow about Eitrigg, Tirion
concluded. “For now, I’m anxious to meet your lovely bride and your son,” Dathrohan said warmly. “I
regret that I couldn’t visit and see the lad when he was born. You know how it is.”
 Tirion nodded. “He’s a good boy. A future Paladin,” he said assuredly. He felt beads of sweat forming
on his brow. He tried to calm himself and behave naturally. He felt as if Dathrohan were looking right
through him. He nearly jumped as Dathrohan belted out a hearty laugh.
 “Of that I have little doubt. I suspect that the Fordring line will always be there to defend Lordaeron and
its people,” Dathrohan said, smiling.
 Tirion smiled back and nodded while saying, “I certainly hope so.”
 
 Hours later, Tirion’s advisors had gathered in the council room. A few of Dathrohan’s senior lieutenants
were present as well. Barthilas, who looked very excited by the new arrivals, stood near the back of the
room and remained silent. Lord Commander Dathrohan had taken a seat at the head of the table, next to
Tirion. There was a tension in the room as all present speculated on the urgent matter that Dathrohan had
come to discuss.
 “Now, then,” Dathrohan began, looking levelly at Tirion. “I received news that there are orcs in
Hearthglen. What exactly is the current situation?” he asked.
 Tirion swallowed, his throat suddenly dry. “Milord, a few days ago, I had an encounter with an orc
warrior,” he said. “Though I wounded it badly, I was knocked out before I could slay the creature. I
returned to the spot where we battled in order to determine if the creature still lived. And, to discern
whether or not there are others of its kind within my borders. My findings led me to believe that it was an
isolated incident and that there were no other orcs accompanying it,” Tirion finished. He was on
dangerous ground. He had no wish to lie to his superior. Honor forbade it.
 Dathrohan leaned back in his chair, rubbing his bearded chin and pondering Tirion’s response. “And you
conducted your investigation alone?” Dathrohan asked.
 Tirion nodded. “Yes, milord.”
 “It is unfortunate that you didn’t have others with you to verify your findings, Tirion. Apparently, your
retainers don’t share your optimistic appraisal of the situation.” Dathrohan said grimly. Tirion scowled.
He didn’t even have to look at the back of the room to sense Barthilas’ smug satisfaction.
 “Paladin Barthilas sent me news of the affair. He seems to believe that the threat to these lands is far
more dire than you do. I have come to find out for myself if this land is in peril,” the Lord Commander
said sternly.
 Tirion then turned to stare at Barthilas’ bemused face. He fought down his rage at the youth’s audacity.
He turned back to Dathrohan. “Saidan, we’ve been friends for years. Surely you don’t doubt my
judgment in this matter? Honestly, young Barthilas’ actions are a clear affront to my authority over this
land. His zeal is commendable, but to worry you over such a minor matter is perplexing to say the least!”
 Dathrohan put his hand on Tirion’s arm to calm him.
 “Tirion, I have always trusted your judgment. I have never questioned your honor or authority, and I do
not intend to start doing so now. Under normal circumstances, I would never intervene in a matter like
this, but certain events have transpired that force me to look critically at any possible orcish incursions.”
 Dathrohan leaned in and searched the eyes of the gathered advisors. “For some time, we have been
receiving reports that there is a new, upstart Warchief amongst the orcs. Apparently, this young orc is
intent on rallying the clans and re-forming the Horde. Though they are few, his fanatical warriors have
somehow overrun many of the guarded reserves and appear to be amassing stronger numbers. The
Alliance High Command has deemed that we are in a state of emergency. I tell you all of this so that you
understand my motives. If there is any truth behind Barthilas’ claims, then it is imperative that we prepare
ourselves for war,” he said grimly.
 The shocked advisors began to converse amongst themselves. Dathrohan turned to face Tirion. “Old
friend, with all due respect, I cannot rely on your instincts alone. This situation is far too volatile.”
 Tirion shook his head in disbelief. He braced himself for what he knew was coming next.
 “At first light, we will head out and scour the woodlands for more definitive proof of orcish activity.
Tirion, I want you to personally lead us to where you encountered the orc. If the creature be found, we
will take it back to Stratholme for interrogation,” Dathrohan finished.
 Tirion’s heart dropped. There was no way out now. He had been given a direct order. He would be
forced to break his vow to Eitrigg. “As you wish, milord,” Tirion said in a strained voice.
 Dathrohan seemed content to let the matter rest. He dismissed the advisors and suggested that everyone
prepare their men. Tirion stood to exit and saw Barthilas staring at him from the doorway. The young
Paladin’s face was alight with victory. Tirion had to fight back the sudden urge to strangle the smirking
youth. Without giving Barthilas a second glance, he left the room and made ready for the morning’s
expedition.
 
 Dawn had already bathed the land with its first rays as the force of knights and footmen made their way
into the forested foothills. Tirion, Arden and Dathrohan led the shining column down the dusty hunting
path that snaked its way through the dense woods. Barthilas hung back behind them, preferring to
converse with the veteran soldiers under Dathrohan’s command.
 Clearly, the young Paladin was eager to prove himself in battle. Tirion was glad that the youth stayed
away. He was disgusted with Barthilas and didn’t even want to see his face.
 Tirion was in a grim mood. He had slept little during the night, and woke with his guts tied in knots. He
wished that he could somehow warn Eitrigg so that the old orc could evade capture. But Tirion knew
that, even if he could warn the orc, his actions would betray his superior’s direct order. He knew that
there was no way to uphold his vow and do his duty at the same time. His precious honor was in great
peril.
 They rode for hours up into the mountains as Tirion led the way. He knew exactly where he was going.
Before long the broken tower’s remaining walls could be seen through the trees. Dathrohan leaned in and
asked Tirion if it was the tower they sought.
 “That is where I first encountered the orc, milord,” Tirion said in a quiet voice.
 Dathrohan nodded, sensing Tirion’s apprehension. “Are you certain, Tirion? You seem rather pensive
this morning.”
 “I am certain, milord,” Tirion replied huskily. “I’m fine. I’m just a tad tired, is all.”
 Dathrohan patted his shoulder reassuringly. The Lord Commander motioned for his men to take up
positions along the road. He then called for a number of guards to come to the front of the column.
Arden was among those who came forward. The captain smiled up at Tirion, but the Paladin didn’t feel
like smiling at all. Tirion shuddered as two of the guards pulled a makeshift wagon-cage behind them. The
rickety cage was designed to hold and transport a small number of prisoners over long distances. He
fervently hoped that it would stay empty.
 Dathrohan, feeling that stealth would be wise until they confirmed that there were numerous orcs in the
area, ordered his men to remain behind as he and a small group moved in on the lonely tower.
 Barthilas, with a fiery enthusiasm, rode eagerly behind the Lord Commander. Tirion, Arden and six
footmen continued up the path after them.
 
 The clearing around the tower was quiet, but the footmen moved quietly enough despite their
cumbersome armor and weapons. Following the instructions he had been given earlier, Arden
commanded his guards to encircle the tower. Barthilas dismounted and retrieved his warhammer from its
saddle-loop. Escorted by two footmen, Barthilas cautiously made his way to the tower’s entrance.
Stopping a short distance from the ravaged entryway, Barthilas called out in his most authoritative voice:
 “We come in the name of the Alliance! Come out from there and surrender yourselves, you foul beasts,
or we’ll be forced to kill you!” His voice was edgy and quavered slightly. Tirion knew that the
unseasoned Paladin was quaking in his boots. Beads of sweat ran down Barthilas’ scowling face. A
shuffling noise came from the tower’s ruined guardroom. The two footmen near Barthilas braced
themselves for an attack. Barthilas gripped his warhammer tightly, trying to keep his nerves in check.
 Slowly, the silhouette of a large orc emerged from the room’s shadows and stood in the entranceway.
Eitrigg held his battle-ax with both hands and looked ready to go down fighting. The orc scanned the
human faces with furious eyes. He caught sight of Tirion, sitting atop his horse, and he scowled deeply.
Tirion’s eyes locked with the orc’s for a moment, but he was forced to look away. The orc’s disgusted
gaze told Tirion everything he needed to know—that Eitrigg thought his notion of honor was laughable.
The old orc had saved his life, and he had repaid the debt by leading enemies straight to his home. Never
in his life had Tirion felt such dejection and self-loathing.
 Eitrigg took a couple of steps into the clearing. Tirion noticed that he was limping more than when he last
saw him. The orc’s wound must be badly infected, he thought. Eitrigg’s eyes blazed with hate and fury.
Tirion could see that the orc would not allow himself to be taken alive.
 As if in response to his thought, Dathrohan spoke up. “I do not want the creature killed. I need him
alive!” he said. Barthilas took a quick moment to look back in dismay, but seemed to understand the
order clearly enough. Arden and his guards converged on the tower, intending to aid in the orc’s capture.
Barthilas was so nervous his hands shook. He could feel the eyes of Dathrohan and Tirion upon him. This
was the moment he had waited for. This was his moment of glory.
 With a strangled cry, Barthilas lunged at the orc, swinging his hammer—intent on delivering a killing blow
to the orc, regardless of what Dathrohan had asked.Surely, no savage beast could match his
Light-born powers, he thought.
 Tirion winced as Eitrigg adeptly blocked the young Paladin’s clumsy blow and slammed his stout fist into
Barthilas’ face. Panicking, Barthilas dropped his hammer as Eitrigg kicked him squarely in the midsection.
The young Paladin, having had the wind knocked out of him, crashed to the ground and doubled over in
a fetal position. Eitrigg grunted derisively at Barthilas’ weakness and ineptitude.
 The two footmen rushed at the orc, slashing wildly. Eitrigg parried the first footman’s attack and struck
the second footman squarely in the chest, nearly cutting the warrior in half. The remaining footman, seeing
the orc’s apparent savagery and skill, backed off a pace in horror. Arden and his guards, enraged by
their comrade’s swift death, rushed forward madly. Tirion saw that they would kill the orc if they could.
 “Don’t kill him!” Tirion screamed frantically as the warriors descended upon the old orc. Dathrohan,
sensing Tirion’s obvious concern for the creature, looked at his friend questioningly. “You seem very
concerned for the orc’s safety, Tirion,” the Lord Commander said evenly. “Thisis just a routine capture.
Are you all right?”
 Tirion gritted his teeth. He couldn’t just sit there and watch the proud orc be cut down. But neither could
he beg for the orc’s release. To do so would brand him as a traitor. This was all his doing.
 Eitrigg fought bravely against the footmen, but he was easily outmaneuvered, due to his wounded leg.
The six footmen succeeded in pulling the mighty orc down to the ground. Arden smashed the orc’s hand,
and Eitrigg loosed his hold on his ax. The warriors immediately began to beat the orc to within an inch of
his life.
 Every fiber of Tirion’s body was ablaze with rage as he watched the footmen subdue the orc. He
dismounted quickly and walked forward, intending to pull the footmen away. As the footmen pulled the
bleeding orc to his feet, Tirion’s resolve to save the creature slipped and he stopped.What was he
thinking? He couldn’t let this happen, but neither could he take up arms against his own men. His every
muscle tensed as he stood undecided.
 With a loud moan, Barthilas raised himself up from the dirt. Arden helped him to stand and brushed him
off. Barthilas, feeling deeply embarrassed and shamed before his superiors, rushed at the orc in a rage.
Arden and Tirion both grabbed the young Paladin’s arms and restrained him. They exchanged knowing
glances and held Barthilas until he calmed.
 “The bastard creature fought dishonorably!” Barthilas screamed. “He should be killed right here! Let me
go!” He continued to strain against Tirion and Arden.
 “I have ordered that it remain alive, Barthilas,” Dathrohan said. “Your wounded pride is not nearly as
important as the information the creature may have. Restrain the beast,” he ordered. Immediately a
number of footmen appeared, pulling the wagon-cage behind them. They took hold of Eitrigg and threw
him into the cage.
 Tirion turned to face Dathrohan. “Milord, surely this old orc is no threat to anyone,” Tirion began.
Dathrohan looked at him in amazement.
 “What is this, Tirion? Are you actually suggesting that we turn the beast loose?” Barthilas and Arden
stared at him as well, both shocked by Tirion’s statement.
 Tirion turned back to gaze at the beaten orc. His face swollen and dripping blood, Eitrigg stared straight
back.So much for your honor, the orc’s gaze seemed to say. The footmen continued to beat and whip
Eitrigg through the cage’s bars. They spit and hurled obscenities at the old orc.
 Tirion’s nerves finally snapped. He dashed forward and grabbed the guard who was whipping the orc.
He grabbed the whip from the young man and began to lash him with it instead.
 “How does it feel?” Tirion shouted at the terrified guard, who attempted to shield himself from the
Paladin’s raging strikes.
 Dathrohan looked on in unabashed disbelief. Arden felt the same. He rushed forward and grabbed his
lord’s arm. “Tirion, please! What are you doing?” Arden yelled.
 Tirion shrugged him off and stood to face Dathrohan with the light of rage in his eyes. “The orc must be
set free!” he yelled. “It is a matter of honor!” Tirion pushed Arden away and smashed at the cage’s lock
with the haft of the whip’s long handle.
 “Tirion, have you taken leave of your senses?” Dathrohan yelled in a deep voice. Barthilas merely stood
by, mouth agape. Tirion continued to smash at the lock. Shaking his head wearily, Dathrohan ordered the
footmen to seize and restrain the raging Paladin. Arden’s troops grabbed hold of Tirion’s arms and
wrestled him to the ground. Tirion fought with all of his strength, but the younger men easily overpowered
him.
 Arden pleaded with him to submit. “My lord, please stop! What the hell is wrong with you?” he asked.
After a brief struggle, the guards brought Tirion to his feet. The Paladin looked at Eitrigg, and was met
only with a blank stare in return.
 “Tirion, what in the Light’s name has come over you? Your actions are treasonous! Tell me you have
some explanation for all of this! Tell me you didn’t just try to free this creature!” Dathrohan yelled.
 Tirion attempted to compose himself. “This orc saved my life, Saidan!” Tirion yelled. “During our battle,
part of the tower’s ceiling collapsed. I was left trapped and defenseless. The orc pulled me free before
the entire roof came crashing down. I know it sounds impossible, but it happened.”
 Dathrohan was stunned. Arden could only stare at his lord in shock.Certainly Tirion didn’t really
believe the orc had saved him, did he? He looked into his lord’s eyes and knew that, indeed, he did.
 “I vowed to let him live in peace, and by my honor, I will fight to see that he does!” Tirion renewed his
struggle against the footmen, attempting to free his arms.
 Barthilas seemed to come out of his momentary shock. “Traitor!” the young Paladin screamed. “He is a
traitor to the Alliance! He’s been consorting with this beast all along!”
 Dathrohan couldn’t believe his ears. He had always known Tirion to be an honorable, levelheaded man.
But here he was, defying his superior and siding with his mortal enemy all the same. “Tirion, I’m trying
hard to be patient. Obviously, you’re very confused about this creature. Regardless of what you believe
happened, if you do not desist, I will be forced to have you arrested and placed on trial for treason! You
will cease this senselessness at once!”
 Tirion persisted. “Damn it, Saidan! This is a matter of honor! Don’t you understand that?” he growled
through clenched teeth.
 “I stand witness to his treachery, milord,” Barthilas said proudly to Dathrohan. Obviously the young
Paladin sought to make up for his defeat by endearing himself to the conflicted Lord Commander.
 “Shut up, Barthilas!” Dathrohan growled. With a heavy heart, he motioned for the footmen to subdue
Tirion. “You leave me no choice here, Tirion. I hereby charge you with treason against the Alliance!
Captain Arden, see that the prisoner is bound and placed upon his horse. He will be taken to Stratholme
along with this orc and put on trial.”
 Arden bowed his head in sorrow. Slowly, he tied Tirion’s hands together and led him to his horse. “I am
sorry, milord,” Arden said, looking Tirion in the eye.
 Tirion frowned at his loyal servant. “It is I who am sorry, Arden. This is all my own doing. What I’ve
done, I’ve done for honor’s sake,” Tirion said softly.
 Arden shook his head questioningly. “Tirion, what honor is there in betrayal?” he asked in a whisper.
 “I am a Paladin of the Light, Arden. You wouldn’t understand.” Arden helped him up on his horse.
Dathrohan rode up to Tirion and stared at him.
 “I never thought I’d live to see the day,” the Lord Commander said. Tirion avoided his old friend’s gaze.
Dathrohan, overcome by frustration and sorrow, angrily turned away and motioned for his troops to
move out.
 FIVE
 A Trial of Will
 Tirion sat in a small holding cell that was adjacent to the Hall of Justice, where his trial was to be held.
Through a small window, cut high into the cell’s wall, he could hear the sounds of commerce and activity
emanating from the bustling marketplace of Stratholme. Periodically he heard hammering sounds coming
from the main square. The city’s clamorous sounds were very different from the relaxing rural din of
Mardenholde keep. Fervently, he wished he were back there now. He had no idea how his trial would
go, but he had the distinct impression that no matter what happened in the court, his life would be
irrevocably changed. He thought about his family and the life of affluence and ease he’d shared with
them. Despite himself, he wondered if he hadn’t thrown it all away on a fanciful, selfish whim.
 He had been held in custody for three days. Today he was to be tried for treason against the land he had
spent his life defending. He could scarcely believe it, but depending on what the court decided, he could
face either execution or spending the rest of his days in prison. Karandra would never forgive him for
taking such a risk for the sake of honor alone. He wondered if he’d be able to forgive himself if his wife
was forced to raise their son alone. He laughed softly to himself. He always believed that the only thing
that could possibly keep him from his loved ones was the enemy.What have I done? he asked himself
over and over.
 He was surprised to hear footsteps echo through the adjacent corridor.Surely, the proceedings
haven’t started yet, he thought miserably. He heard the guards outside the door question someone as
the latch clicked and the door opened.
 Arden walked somberly into the room. Tirion brightened somewhat and shook his friend’s hand.
 “It’s good to see you, Arden. Have you been home since my arrest? Have you spoken with my wife?”
he asked hurriedly.
 Arden shook his head and motioned for Tirion to sit down on his cot. “No. They won’t allow me to
leave until the trial is finished, milord,” the captain stated flatly. “I don’t know if Karandra’s been told or
not.”
 Tirion scowled. He knew she must be beside herself with worry. “What of the orc?” Tirion asked.
“What did they do with him?”
 Arden tensed. “Why do you care, Tirion? It is your enemy! I don’t understand why you’re so concerned
about it! There’s no way the creature would have saved your life! It’s a mindless brute!” Arden spat.
 Tirion looked him square in the eye. “Just answer me, Captain,” Tirion said as calmly as he could. He
had to watch his tone—Arden might be the only friend he had left.
 “They’ve been interrogating the creature for the past few nights,” Arden said. “Apparently, it didn’t offer
up anything they didn’t already know. I heard some of the local guards boasting about how they’d beaten
the hell out of it. They’re going to hang the wretched beast tomorrow morning in the square.”
 Tirion’s heart sank. Eitrigg was going to die, and it was all his fault. Somehow, he had to find a way to
make amends—to put things right.
 Arden sensed Tirion’s tension. “Milord, they might execute you for this,” Arden began. “If you confess
and claim that you lost your senses, maybe they’ll relent and let you go. Surely this matter isn’t worth
dying for! You’re a Lord Paladin, for the Light’s sake! People depend on you! You’ve got to snap out of
this!” the captain finished heatedly.
 Tirion only shook his head. “I can’t, Arden. It is a matter of honor. I swore to protect the orc, and I
betrayed that vow. Whatever punishment they charge me with, it is well deserved.”
 Arden ran his hands through his hair in frustration. “This makes no sense, Tirion. Think about your wife
and child!” Arden yelled.
 Tirion stood up to face him. “I am, old friend. What kind of example would I set for my son if my word
counted for nothing? What kind of man would I be seen as then?” Tirion asked.
 Arden turned away, bristling. “It’s not that simple, and you know it!” the captain bellowed. “Just admit
that you made a mistake! Admit that you were wrong to side with the orc, and they might be lenient!
Why do we even have to discuss this? Have you lost all sense, man?”
 Just then the door opened and two guards stepped in. “You’ll have to leave now, Captain,” one of the
guards said. “We are to escort the prisoner to the Hall now.” Arden gave Tirion a last, pleading look and
marched out the door in a huff.
 Tirion straightened and attempted to look as proud and confident as he could. “I am ready, gentlemen,”
he said to them. They bound his hands and led him outside. The bright, midday sun caused Tirion to
wince slightly. His limbs were tired and cramped from the past few days of inactivity. The guards
marched him across the square toward the imposing structure of the Hall of Justice. Out of the corner of
his eye, Tirion caught sight of the gallows’ scaffolding being erected. He surmised that it was the source
of the hammering he had been hearing. Briefly, he visualized Eitrigg standing upon the gallows with a rope
tied around his neck. Tirion had to work hard in order to keep his forced semblance of confidence. If
Eitrigg died, then all his efforts would have been for nothing.
 
 An hour later, Tirion was seated in a large oaken chair in the middle of the polished courtroom floor.
Before him was an immense stage adorned with four throne-like chairs. At the center of the stage,
directly in front of him, was a large lectern where the judge would conduct the trial. Above the stage was
an enormous white flag bearing a stylized blue letterL, which signified the Alliance of Lordaeron. Lining
the vast walls of the chamber were other huge banners representing the seven nations of the Alliance. A
large blue banner embroidered with a golden lion signified the kingdom of Stormwind. Another banner,
black with a red-gauntleted fist, represented the kingdom of Stromgarde. Tirion was too nervous to look
around at the others.
 Though he could not bear to turn around and see his comrades’ accusing faces, he could hear a hundred
voices whispering and muttering at once throughout the grandiose chamber. Through the din, he
discerned that everyone in attendance was shocked to hear that he had betrayed them. Many of the
onlookers had served under his command during the war, and many others he considered to be good
friends. He could feel their communal confusion and scorn buffet him in waves. His trial would not be an
easy one.
 Far to his right, he caught sight of Barthilas sitting in attendance. The young Paladin had a condemning
look in his eye as he gazed intently at Tirion. Tirion wondered why the youth had turned on him so
completely and been so eager to see him disgraced. He turned away from Barthilas as another armored
Paladin made his way to the front of the stage.
 “Defenders of Lordaeron,” the Paladin said in a clear voice, “today we stand in judgment of one of our
own. The trial of Lord Tirion Fordring will now commence.”
 Tirion realized that his palms were sweating. He had to physically restrain himself from shaking. He knew
that the four jurors would enter the Hall soon. Every major trial in Lordaeron was presided over by four
of the highest-ranking lords within the Alliance. Tirion was sure that he’d recognize many of them as his
peers. The attendant onlookers hushed as the first of the jurors entered.
 “All hail Lord Admiral Daelin Proudmoore of Kul’Tiras,” the Paladin said as the tall, lanky figure walked
across the stage. Lord Proudmoore took the throne-like seat on the far right with a look of disquiet on
his proud face. Tirion knew Proudmoore well. Despite being a tactical genius, the Lord Admiral was one
of the greatest heroes of the war. His officer’s uniform and large, ceremonial hat were deep blue and
adorned with golden medals and pins signifying his rank as master of the Alliance’s navies.
 The Paladin spoke again. “All hail Arch-Mage Antonidas of the Magocracy of Dalaran,” he said as the
second juror strode in. A hush descended upon the crowd as the mysterious wizard took his seat. His
lavender hooded robe was adorned with black and gold trim, and he carried a great, polished staff in his
hands. Ever distrustful of magic, Tirion hadn’t had many dealings with wizards over the years, and was
somewhat disconcerted to find that his fate was now in the hands of one. He looked back to the Paladin
as the last two jurors were announced.
 The venerable Archbishop, Alonsus Faol, who had anointed Tirion as a Paladin long ago, walked in and
took a seat next to the lectern.
 Following the Archbishop was the young prince of Lordaeron, Arthas, who had only recently been
made a full Paladin. Tirion had never met the young prince before, but he could see that the handsome
youth radiated goodness and wisdom despite his relatively young age. Tirion wished fervently that
Barthilas had had the prince’s composure, days before.
 With the jurors assembled, the Paladin motioned for everyone to rise for the judge’s entrance. All of the
attendant men and women rose as Uther the Lightbringer entered the Hall and walked forward to the
ornate lectern. The mighty, holy patron of the Knights of the Silver Hand scanned the assembly with stern
eyes the color of ocean storms. His ornately etched silver armor seemed to reflect every light source in
the vast Hall—bathing Uther in a halo of shimmering beauty. Uther was the first Paladin, and was held to
be the mightiest warrior amongst the armies of the Alliance. He was also held to be the wisest and most
noble of all the holy Paladins. Everyone in the room was cowed by his commanding presence.
 Tirion’s mind reeled. Up until that point, he was resolved to stand by his decision and accept his fate
with honor. But, looking up at the stern visage of his powerful superior, his courage wavered.Perhaps
Arden was right? he thought frantically.Maybe he should beg for the court’s mercy and forget that
he ever made a vow to an enemy of humanity? His thoughts were disrupted as the Lightbringer’s
powerful, melodious voice filled his ears.
 “Lord Paladin Fordring,” Uther began. “You are charged with treason against the Alliance and failing to
obey a direct order given to you by your superior. As you know, this is a dire charge. The noble lords
gathered here will hear your case and judge you accordingly under the Light. How do you plead to the
charges against you?” Tirion clenched his fists to keep them from shaking. He barely found the voice to
answer.
 “I am guilty as charged, milord. I accept full responsibility for my actions,” Tirion said.
 A hundred angry voices flooded the room at once. Apparently, many of the onlookers had believed the
charges to be greatly exaggerated or false. The assembly was shocked to hear Tirion admit his guilt so
openly. Tirion looked behind him to watch the crowd’s raucous reaction. He caught sight of Arden sitting
right behind him. The captain’s tortured expression seemed to plead to Tirion to reconsider his position.
Tirion had to look away. Arden believed in him and had always served him loyally. But the captain would
never understand. . . .
 Uther’s voice boomed out as the mighty Paladin commanded the assembly to silence. The gathered host
went quiet as if it had been struck by lightning. Tirion could almost feel an electrical tension in the air. He
braced himself.
 “Very well,” Uther said evenly. “Let the record show that Lord Paladin Fordring has entered a plea of
guilty.”
 Tirion watched as the four jurors conversed amongst themselves for a brief moment. Lord Proudmoore
ended the discussion and motioned for Uther to continue.
 “Let Lord Commander, Saidan Dathrohan, come forward and give his testimony,” Uther commanded.
The crowd stirred slightly as Dathrohan walked toward the stage. He stopped and stood solemnly next
to Tirion’s chair. The two friends exchanged fleeting glances. Dathrohan could only nod sorrowfully at
Tirion.
 “Lord Commander Dathrohan, you have charged this man with treason. Please explain for the court the
occurrence and the nature of this man’s alleged infraction,” Uther said.
 Dathrohan cleared his throat and straightened slightly. “My lords, I do wish to state for the record that
Tirion Fordring has always been a man of honor and nobility. But I cannot deny what I saw with my own
eyes. Four days ago, I led a detachment into the Hearthglen Woods in search of renegade orcs. Lord
Fordring assisted me with the exercise and helped me to track down the orc that we currently hold in our
prison for execution. When I gave the command to arrest the creature, Lord Fordring turned upon my
men and attempted to set the orc free. I asked him repeatedly to desist, but he would not relent. It is with
a heavy heart that I give this testimony,” Dathrohan finished. Once again, murmurs and hushed whispers
floated through the Hall. The jurors discussed Dathrohan’s words as Uther addressed the court again.
 “Is there anyone here who can give credence to Lord Commander Dathrohan’s testimony?” Tirion’s
whole body clenched as he saw Barthilas spring up from his seat.
 “I can, milord,” the young Paladin stated excitedly. “I was there, under Lord Dathrohan’s command,
when the incident took place. I bore witness to Tirion’s treachery firsthand.” The scorn in his voice was
evident when he spoke his superior’s name. Tirion could hear Arden groaning behind him.
 Uther dismissed Dathrohan and motioned for Barthilas to come forward. Dathrohan gripped Barthilas in
a searing gaze as they passed each other. Apparently, the youth’s efforts to win his way into the Lord
Commander’s good graces were not working as well as Barthilas had planned. With surprising calm,
Barthilas took his place near Tirion’s chair. His face was proud and intent.
 “State your claim,junior Paladin Barthilas,” Uther said icily. He was obviously disgruntled by the
younger Paladin’s lack of respect for his superior. Guilty or not, Tirion was still to be addressed by his
title.
 Undeterred, Barthilas continued. “Just as Lord Commander Dathrohan said, milord, I sawLord Fordring
fight to save the orc from capture. He said that he had made a pact with the creature and would be
damned if we incarcerated it,” Barthilas said matter-of-factly. “You see, I knew he was up to something.
I had a feeling that thisvile traitor was untrustworthy even before we set out to capture the orc!”
 “Silence!” Uther shouted, his voice reverberating through the chamber like thunder. He ensnared the
now trembling Barthilas with his overpowering gaze. “You will learn to control your tongue,junior
Paladin. I have known this man for years. We saved each other’s lives more than once, and stood
victorious before the enemy more times than I can clearly remember. Whatever he may have done, he
certainly deserves more than to be harangued by an unseasoned boy like yourself.” Barthilas turned white
as a sheet and looked as if he might faint. “Your testimony has been heard and will be reviewed by the
court. You are dismissed,” Uther finished. Reddening in embarrassment, Barthilas hurried back to his
seat. Tirion watched as the jurors once again began to converse with one another.
 The four lords finished their deliberations and motioned that they were ready to proceed. Uther turned to
stare down at Tirion. His gaze seemed to look straight into Tirion’s heart, searching for some explanation
for his friend’s unprecedented behavior.
 “Lord Paladin Fordring, do you have anything to say in your defense?” Uther asked Tirion levelly.
 Tirion stood up and solemnly addressed the court. “My lords, I know that the notion must sound
preposterous, but the orc saved my life. In return, I gave him my word as a Paladin that I would protect
his as well. The orc’s name is Eitrigg, and he is as honorable an opponent as I have ever faced.” Jeers
and shocked gasps erupted from the assembled onlookers. Tirion continued unabated. “You must
understand me when I tell you—in order to follow my orders, I would have had to betray my honor as a
Paladin. That I could not do. That said, I will accept whatever punishment you deem fit.”
 Uther strode over to the four jurors and knelt beside them. He argued with them briefly, pointing his
finger as if to stress a point. After a few moments, it appeared as if the jurors had relented and Uther
walked back to the lectern, victorious.
 “Lord Paladin Fordring,” he began, “this court is well aware of your long years of service in defense of
Lordaeron and its allied kingdoms. Every man here is aware of your courage and valor. However,
consorting with the sworn enemies of humanity, regardless of their supposed honor, is a grievous crime.
In granting the orc amnesty, you took a terrible risk and gambled the safety of Hearthglen on a personal
whim. In light of your service, this court is prepared to offer you a full pardon if you will disavow your
oath to the creature and reaffirm your commitment to the Alliance.”
 Tirion cleared his throat. It would be so easy to simply give in and go home to his wife and son. He
turned to see Arden wringing his hands in anticipation.
 “Please, milord. Commit to them and be done with it,” Arden whispered anxiously. Tirion saw
Dathrohan take a step forward, as if urging him to forget about the orc and clear his good name.
 “Let’s put this nonsense behind us, Tirion,” Dathrohan exclaimed under his breath.
 “Lord Paladin Fordring? What is your answer?” Uther asked suspiciously, seeing Tirion’s hesitation.
 Tirion braced himself and faced the court members boldly. “What is to be done with the orc, milord?”
The great Paladin looked surprised by the question, but saw fit to answer anyway.
 “It will be executed, like any other enemy of humanity. Regardless of your personal experience with the
creature, it is a savage, murdering beast that cannot be allowed to live.”
 Tirion bowed his head and thought for a moment. He pictured Taelan’s innocent face in his mind’s eye.
He wanted to go home, so badly . . . .
 He raised his head and saw Dathrohan give him a pleased smile; the Lord Commander seemed
convinced that Tirion would make the right decision. Tirion saw his course plainly. He would make the
only decision honor would permit.
 “I will remain committed to the Alliance until my dying day. Of that, have no doubt,” Tirion said
confidently. “But I cannot disavow the oath I took. To do so would be to betray everything I am and
everything we, as honorable men, hold dear.”
 This time the entire gathering erupted in fury and shock. None could believe Tirion’s brazen decision.
Even the noble jurors gaped openmouthed at Tirion. The tired Paladin thought he heard Arden weeping
behind him, and his heart sank even lower. Dathrohan sat down heavily in his chair, shaking his head in
dismay. Barthilas seemed to be on the verge of jumping out of his seat in excitement. Many of the
gathered warriors began to shout obscenities at Tirion and call him a traitor. Some spat at him as he
stood motionless before the stage.
 Rubbing his eyes wearily, Uther motioned for the court to fall silent once more. He was beside himself
with anguish over what he must do, but Tirion had stated his position clearly.
 “So be it,” Uther said ominously. “Tirion Fordring, from this day forth you are no longer welcome among
the Knights of the Silver Hand. You are no longer fit to bask in the grace of the Light. I hereby
excommunicate you from our ranks.”
 The audience gasped at Uther’s words. Excommunication was a rare, harsh punishment that stripped a
Paladin of his Light-given powers. Though it had only been used a few times, every Paladin lived in
mortal fear of it. Tirion could not fathom what was about to happen. Before he could utter another word,
Uther made a sweeping motion with his hand. Immediately, Tirion felt a dark shadow pass over him,
choking out the holy power of the Light. Panic threatened to overwhelm him as the grace and
strengthening energies of the Light fled his body. The blessed energies, which had been such an integral
part of him for so long, ebbed away just as if they had never been. Though the light of the Hall never
wavered, Tirion felt as if he had been wrapped in darkness and cast down into oblivion. Unable to
withstand the raging despair and hopelessness that washed over him in waves, Tirion lowered his head in
abject despair.
 Uther continued. “All trappings of our order will be stripped from you,” he said as two Paladins came
forward and viciously ripped the silver plates from Tirion’s wracked body, “as well as your personal titles
and holdings.”
 Tirion struggled against despair. Never in his life had he felt so naked and powerless. Images of Taelan
and Karandra sifted through his tortured mind. He had to get a grip on himself. He had to think of his
dignity. On wobbly legs, he stood and faced the court once more.
 “You shall be exiled from these kingdoms and live the rest of your days amongst the wild things of the
world. May the Light have mercy on your soul,” Uther finished.
 Tirion felt dazed, His head spun and anxiety threatened to overtake him. He was barely conscious of
Uther’s next words to the assembly:
 “Though it goes against my better judgment, it is the will of this court that Paladin Barthilas take over as
regent governor of Hearthglen, effective immediately. Barthilas is to remain here to oversee the morning’s
hanging and then return home to his duties. The exile, Tirion Fordring, is to be escorted back to
Mardenholde keep. There he will collect his family and be escorted to the borders of the Alliance lands.
These proceedings are over,” Uther said, smashing his armored fist against the lectern. He gazed at Tirion
in frustration, clearly disgusted with the trial’s outcome.
 “My lord, I have one last question,” Tirion barely managed to say. Uther paused to listen—a final
gesture of respect and friendship for his former comrade. “My wife and son . . . are they to be exiled as
well? Will my sin damn their lives as it has mine?” Tirion asked shakily.
 Uther bowed his head in sorrow. The man before him was a good man. This was no way for a hero to
be treated.
 “No, Tirion. They may remain in Lordaeron if they so desire. This was your crime, not theirs. They
should not be punished for your pride,” Uther said. He then turned his back on Tirion and departed. Lost
in a haze of despair and grief, Tirion was barely aware of the guards hauling him out of the Great Hall.
 SIX
 A Sort of Homecoming
 It was twilight as the tired envoy made its way back to Mardenholde keep. It had begun to rain during
the afternoon, and the weary horses trudged their way down the muddy road. Arden, leading the somber
column of knights and footmen, looked back at Tirion worriedly. Tirion was slumped over in his saddle,
heedless of what transpired around him. His broad shoulders drooped weakly and his head was bowed
in grief. The ceaseless rain ran in rivulets down his haggard face. Arden’s heart broke, seeing his former
lord and master in such a state. He was forced to look away. Looking toward the keep, the captain saw
that Tirion’s advisors had gathered at the main gate to greet their returning lord.
 Tirion’s stomach was tied in knots. He was blocked from the Light. In the thirty years that he had served
as a Paladin, he never dreamed that the blessed power would be stripped from him. He felt absolutely
hollow inside. Wallowing in despair and misery, he was unable to even lift his eyes toward the sight of his
former home.
 Arden rode slowly up to the gate and dismounted. The advisors, at seeing Tirion’s near-comatose state,
asked the captain what was wrong.
 Arden grimaced. “There have been some changes,” he said to them curtly. The advisors looked at each
other in confusion.
 “What do you mean, Captain? Where have you both been these past few days? What is wrong with our
lord?” one of them asked heatedly.
 Arden bowed his head in shame and sorrow. “Our lord Tirion has been found guilty of treason against
the Alliance,” he said with a heavy heart. “The High Court has ordered that he be exiled from our lands.”
The advisors gasped in shock.
 “Surely you must be mistaken. That’s impossible!” one of the advisors said shakily. He looked into
Arden’s eyes and saw that it clearly was not.
 “It can’t be,” the advisor said blankly. Arden nodded grimly and helped Tirion dismount from his horse.
 “Well, who is our lord now, Arden? Who will rule over Hearthglen?” another advisor asked. Arden
shook his head and scoffed as he answered, “Barthilas will be your new lord, for the time being.”It did
sound like a bad joke, he thought to himself. He put his arm around Tirion and started to lead him
inside. “I want the guards to stay alert tonight. Tirion is to remain here under house arrest. At first light, I
will take a party of footmen and escort him to the border. Until then, neither of us is to be disturbed. Is
that clear?” the captain asked in a gravelly voice.
 The shocked advisors merely nodded their assent. Arden dragged Tirion in out of the rain and ushered
him toward his private chambers, hoping that he wouldn’t have to face Karandra before morning. Not for
the first time, he wondered if there was anything that he could have done to prevent this all from
happening.
 
 Arden leaned Tirion the against wall outside his private chambers and opened the door.
 “Thanks for your help, Arden. This has been. . . very difficult. I just wanted you to know that you’ve
been a good friend to me. I’m sorry all this has happened,” the former Paladin said.
 Arden nodded and turned away slowly. “If there’s anything you need, let me know,” the captain said as
he left.
 Tirion watched him leave and found just enough strength to close the door behind him and collapse in a
chair. Overcome with emotion, he buried his face in his hands. His limbs would not stop shaking, and the
gnawing emptiness in his gut threatened to devour what was left of his soul. He couldn’t face his wife and
tell her what he’d done. Ironically, after all the years he’d refused to lie to her, he found now that he
couldn’t bear to tell her the truth.
 The adjoining door to Taelan’s room opened and Karandra stepped out quietly, shutting it behind her.
She looked surprised to see Tirion sitting there in the dark.
 “Tirion, what has happened?” she asked urgently. She lit a decorative lantern, and its soft light bathed
the room. Shadows danced across the walls as she knelt down beside her husband.
 “Where have you been? I’ve been worried sick.”
 “I accompanied Lord Dathrohan back to Stratholme,” he muttered, his head still bowed.
 “You know, Tirion, you’ve been sneaking off quite a bit lately. If I didn’t know you any better, I’d
assume that you were seeking comfort from another woman,” she said teasingly. Tirion raised his head
and looked at her. Seeing the deadened look in his eyes, she knew that he was not amused in the least.
 “Tirion, darling, what’s wrong? Has something happened to you?” she asked worriedly. He looked over
toward Taelan’s room.
 “Is the boy asleep?” he asked quietly. Karandra frowned and answered that he was.
 “I don’t quite know how to tell you this, my love,” he began somberly, “but I have been branded a
traitor and stripped of my titles.”
 Her eyes widened in shock. He wasn’t joking, she realized. In fact, as she looked at him more closely,
she marveled at how defeated and deflated he seemed. In all the years she had known him, he had never
looked this way. It frightened her immensely. She shook her head, unable to grasp the enormity of the
situation.
 “How could this happen, Tirion? What have you done?” she asked in a strangled voice.
 He closed his eyes and held his breath for a moment, attempting to calm the furious pounding of his
heart. ‘Do you remember the secret that I kept from you?” he asked. She nodded as her brow creased
in anxiety. “The orc I fought with saved my life, Karandra. If not for him, I would have been crushed
under a collapsing tower. To repay him for saving me, I vowed, on my honor, to keep his existence
secret.”
 Karandra covered her face. She shook her head as if she didn’t want to hear any more, but Tirion
continued anyway.
 “I was forced to hunt the orc down under direct orders. But when it came time to capture him, my
conscience overtook me. To uphold my honor, I fought to free it. I was arrested on the spot and taken to
Stratholme for trial,” he finished.
 They sat there in silence for many long moments. Karandra sniffed and wiped tears from her eyes. “I
can’t even begin to imagine what you were thinking,” she said breathlessly. “The orc is a beast, Tirion! It
has no concept of honor! You gambled all our lives on a stupid, silly whim!” she spat, careful to keep her
voice down. She didn’t want to wake Taelan and let him see his father in such a state. Tirion simply sat
with his head bowed. For some strange reason, seeing him in such a weakened state only made her more
anxious.
 “So what happens to us now, Tirion? Did you even consider that while you were playing the martyr?”
she said softly, disappointment rampant in her voice.
 He stood up and walked over to the window. Night had settled heavily over the fields beyond the keep.
The rain continued to pour, as if nature was attempting to rid itself of some foulness in the world.
 “I have been exiled, Karandra. I am to be escorted to the border at first light,” he said gravely. She
blinked in shock.
 “Exiled?” she whispered. “Light-damn you, Tirion! I told you your precious honor would be the end of
us!”
 He turned to face her. “Without honor, woman, everything we have is meaningless!” he said, motioning
around at their lavish surroundings.
 She waved her arm dismissively.
 “Will your honor keep us fed and keep our son decently clothed? How can you maintain this senseless
obsession in the face of what’s happened? What happened to the responsible man I married?” she
asked.
 He gritted his teeth and turned to face her. “I have always been this way, Karandra! Don’t talk to me as
if it’s any surprise! You knew that marrying a Paladin would demand certain sacrifices.”
 “And I’ve made plenty of them. Willingly! I held my tongue every time you rode off to battle. I sat here,
alone, for countless hours—waiting to hear if you were alive or dead. Do you have any idea of what that
was like for me? I never complained once all those times that you left us for your bureaucratic duties. I
knew you had a job to do. I knew people counted on you. But I counted on you, too, damn it! I kept it
all inside so that you could ‘do your duty’ with honor. I know all about sacrifices, Tirion. But this time the
price is too high.”
 “What do you mean by that?” he asked, although he already knew the answer. She held him in her fiery
stare.
 “I love you, Tirion. Please believe that. But I won’t be coming with you . . . and neither will Taelan,” she
said softly. Karandra turned away, unable to look him in the eye. “I will not have our son grow up as an
outcast or be the subject of ridicule for the rest of his life. He doesn’t deserve that, Tirion, and neither do
I,” she said.
 Tirion felt as if his life no longer had any meaning. Losing the Light was devastating enough; he didn’t
know if he could bear losing her too. His head spun.
 “I understand how you must feel, Karandra. Believe me, I do,” he barely managed to say. “Are you
certain this is what you want?”
 “You’ve ruined your life. I will not simply hold on while you plummet to the bottom and ruin ours as
well!” she said, almost frantically. She hugged herself, trying to calm her raw nerves. “I hope your
precious honor keeps you warm at night,” she said.
 “Karandra, wait,” Tirion said as she left. She walked swiftly toward her room and slammed the door
shut behind her. Tirion heard the bolt lock, and the faint sounds of her sobbing.
 Unable to comfort her, Tirion leaned his head against the window’s cool pane of glass. Absently, he
watched as the raindrops splattered against the pane. He knew her well enough to know that she would
not change her mind. He had lost nearly everything he had ever cared for. The only thing he had left in the
world was his honor. He wasn’t even sure of that anymore.
 As if in a daze, Tirion walked into his reading room and sat down at his large, polished oak desk. He lit
a few candles and gathered up a piece of parchment, ink and a new quill. Without really knowing exactly
what he wanted to say, he started scribbling down his thoughts on the parchment. His hand shook as he
wrote, smearing the ink in spots. He emptied his heart out onto the parchment, expressing everything he
felt, explaining everything he had done. He sat at the desk and wrote late into the night.
 
 Morning was only an hour off when Tirion entered Taelan’s darkened room. Karandra had cried herself
to sleep hours before, so Tirion knew he would be undisturbed. He walked over to where his son lay
sleeping peacefully. Snuggled in his blankets, the boy breathed steadily. Tirion watched him sleep for a
while, awed by the child’s innocence and purity. He knew his son deserved better than a life of forced
exile. He deserved all of the good things life had to offer.
 With a shaky hand, Tirion reached into his coat pocket and retrieved the rolled parchment he had
written. Tears filled his eyes as he carefully placed the note under his son’s pillow.Perhaps someday the
boy might understand what I’ve done, he hoped.Perhaps somehow he’ll look back on me and be
proud. Tirion patted the boy’s head and kissed him on the cheek.
 “Good-bye, my son,” he said, fighting back his tears. “Be good.”
 With that, he quietly left and closed the door behind him.
 
 Dawn had broken over the tranquil fields of Hearthglen. The oppressive storm clouds had blown away
and the sky was bright and crystal clear. In a few hours, the old orc Eitrigg would be hanged in
Stratholme. Tirion had decided that he would not let that happen. Whatever else transpired, Eitrigg would
not die. He had little trouble bypassing the keep’s lax guardsmen and reaching the stables. As quietly as
he could, he saddled Mirador and prepared his meager supplies for the journey to Stratholme.
 He placed his foot in the stirrup and hauled himself up onto his horse.
 “This is the second time I’ve caught you trying to sneak off, Tirion,” Arden said, standing in the
entranceway. Tirion’s heart froze. He looked around and saw that there were no guards with the captain.
In fact, there was no escort party to be seen anywhere.
 “I figured you’d try something like this,” the captain said.
 Tirion gripped his reins tightly and cleared his throat. “Are you here to stop me, Arden?” he asked
tightly.
 The captain walked over and tightened the straps of Mirador’s saddlebags. “Even if I had a mind to, I
doubt that I could,” Arden replied honestly. “I sat up all night thinking about what you said at the trial. I
think perhaps I understand how you felt. You were only doing what you thought was right. You always
have. For that, I cannot condemn you.”
 Tirion nodded and leaned down. He placed his hand on Arden’s shoulder.
 “I need to ask you a favor, old friend. It is the most important thing I’ve ever asked of you,” he said
breathlessly.
 Arden looked up at him gravely. “Whatever is in my power to do, I will do,” the captain said.
 “Watch over them for me, Arden. Keep my boy safe,” Tirion said.
 Arden reached up and took hold of his friend’s hand. “I will,” was all he could say.
 Satisfied, Tirion nodded to Arden and looked out toward the distant tree line. He dug his spurs into
Mirador’s sides and thundered out of the stables. Stratholme was only a few hours away. If he rode like
the wind, he would make it in time to stop the hanging. He charged down the path at breakneck speed,
pushing the faithful Mirador faster and harder than he ever had before.
 SEVEN
 The Drums of War
 Tirion made good time reaching Stratholme. The sun had just barely crested the distant Alterac peaks by
the time he reached the city’s outskirts. He had tethered Mirador in the woods and ran the last quarter
mile to the city. As he ran, he attempted to formulate a plan to save old Eitrigg. Much to his dismay, he
came up with nothing. He hoped that when the time came, he would think of something brilliant that
didn’t involve killing or injuring his own people. However, seeing as how he was a convicted traitor, they
certainly would have no qualms about killing him. He knew that the likelihood of saving the orc and
escaping Stratholme alive was slim.
 Undeterred, Tirion stealthily made his way through Stratholme’s quiet, cobblestone streets. A few
merchants and vendors were beginning to set up their wares for the day’s transactions in the
marketplace, but there were few others about at that early hour. He managed to evade the few guards he
saw walking the streets. Fearing that the local guardsmen would recognize him, Tirion kept to the
shadows and stayed well out of sight.
 As Tirion neared the public square, he began to hear loud voices shouting and jeering. He hoped he was
not too late to save the orc. He stepped into the square and saw a large gathering of men at its center.
Clinging to the shadows, Tirion climbed a short staircase and situated himself in a small, recessed alcove
that offered a full view of the newly erected gallows. The crowd that had gathered around the scaffolding
was comprised mostly of guards and footmen. They had all come to see the spectacle of the old orc’s
hanging. Thankfully, Tirion realized that the prisoner had not yet been brought out. The gathered men
merely jeered and shouted at one another in anticipation.
 There were a number of knights, dressed in their finest armor, surrounding the square. They stood quiet
and vigilant, ready to intercede if the volatile crowd turned into a mob. Tirion recognized many of the
knights who had been present at his trial. Although they were relatively calm, Tirion knew that they
wanted to see the orc hanged as much as the footmen and the guards did.
 After a few moments, the gathering stirred as a newcomer strode up to the gallows. Tirion saw that it
was Barthilas. The young Paladin waved and shouted to the crowd enthusiastically, riling them up for
what he obviously considered to be the morning’s entertainment. Tirion was glad that he couldn’t hear
Barthilas’ words. He suspected that they were filled with poison and hatred. He felt a momentary pang of
remorse, knowing that his beloved Hearthglen was now in Barthilas’ unstable hands.
 
 Tirion watched as a second figure emerged from the throng and ascended the scaffolding. Lord
Dathrohan, seemingly oblivious to the crowd’s raucous din, walked up to Barthilas’ side and scanned the
square with stern eyes. He spoke to the crowd for a moment and the jeering died down to a low roar.
Tirion held his breath. He knew they would bring Eitrigg out soon. Minutes passed by slowly as Tirion
waited anxiously beneath the alcove. A tension built amongst the onlookers as well. They seemed more
eager to watch a neck snap than see true justice met. As the din rose up again, more and more people
gathered in the square. Even women and children edged closer, hoping to catch sight of the terrible orcish
monster.
 Finally, the gates to the nearby holding cell opened and a squad of footmen strode out in tight formation.
The gathered onlookers erupted in cheers and began to hurl garbage and stones at the newcomers.
Armored as they were, the footmen took little notice of the crowd’s fervor or its harmless projectiles.
Their shiny armor flashed in the morning light, but Tirion could see that they dragged a huddled shape
among them.
 It was Eitrigg.
 They stopped at the base of the scaffolding, and two men dragged the old orc up the rest of the way.
The orc was barely able to stand and his green body was covered with dark bruises and lacerations.
 Tirion wondered how the weakened orc could even walk. Apparently the interrogators had taken their
time in beating him. Despite his injuries, Eitrigg did his best to keep his head raised. He would not give his
tormentors the satisfaction of seeing him broken. Tirion knew that Eitrigg’s orcish spirit was too proud for
that.
 Tirion’s heart pounded in his chest. Against such a spirited group of warriors, he didn’t stand a chance
of saving the old orc.He didn’t have a plan. He didn’t even have a weapon of any kind. He looked
down and saw that the hangman was adjusting the tightly wound noose.Eitrigg was only moments
away from death.
 Frantically, Tirion leaped down from his perch and pushed his way through the boisterous crowd. In
their excitement, no one noticed the disgraced exile passing by them. Their attention was focused on the
gallows and the beaten green beast that stood before them.
 Tirion watched as Lord Dathrohan gave Barthilas a stiff salute and walked back down toward the
holding cell’s gates. Apparently the Lord Commander had no interest in watching the vulgar spectacle so
soon after Tirion’s trial. Barthilas was none too concerned to see him go. Smiling broadly, Barthilas
ordered the hangman to put the noose around the orc’s throat. Eitrigg scowled as the rope was tightened
around his muscular neck. The orc’s dark eyes stared straight forward, as if he were looking into another
world that no one else could see. Tirion clawed and shoved his way closer to the scaffolding. Barthilas
waved his hand in the air, motioning for silence. Surprisingly, the raucous crowd quieted down.
 “My fellow defenders of Lordaeron,” he began proudly, “I am glad to see that so many of you turned
out this morning. This loathsome creature that stands before you is an affront to the Light and an enemy
of our people. Its cursed race brought war and suffering to our shores and murdered many of our loved
ones with little or no remorse. Thus,” Barthilas continued, staring Eitrigg in the eye, “we will extinguish this
wretched creature’s life just as remorselessly.” Eitrigg met Barthilas’ fevered gaze with his own. “Blood
for blood. Debt for debt,” the young Paladin finished.
 The crowd cheered wildly for Barthilas and screamed for the orc’s blood. Tirion marveled that his own
people could be so savage and vile. He felt sick and overwhelmed by their smothering, collective hatred.
 Barthilas stepped back as the hangman moved Eitrigg into position over the scaffolding’s trap door. The
old orc’s stoic mask began to slip as death approached. Eitrigg began to shake and growl and fight
against his restraints. The onlookers merely laughed at his futile efforts. They seemed to revel in the old
orc’s panic and confusion.
 Searching for some type of weapon, Tirion saw an old, rusted sledgehammer leaning against the base of
the scaffolding. He pushed his way through the front row of onlookers and dove for the sledgehammer.
Time seemed to stand still as Tirion reached out to grasp the unwieldy tool. As if in slow motion, he
watched as the hangman placed his hand upon the trap door lever while Barthilas raised his arm, ready to
give the signal that would end the orc’s life. Tirion’s hands closed over the sledgehammer’s wooden haft
as, in a surge of light and adrenaline, he charged forward.
 
 The assembled knights and footmen yelled in anger at seeing Tirion emerge from the roiling crowd. The
former Paladin struck fast and hard, leaving the surprised footmen scattered in his wake. A few alert
guards rushed at him, but Tirion swung the old sledgehammer in a wide arc. Careful not to use lethal
force, Tirion punched a deep dent in one guard’s breastplate and smashed in another’s helmet-visor.
Seeing that he had bought himself a few, precious seconds, Tirion leaped up onto the scaffolding and
headed straight for Barthilas.
 The young Paladin was shocked at seeing Tirion charging at him. He fumbled awkwardly for his
warhammer, but Tirion was too fast. He rammed his shoulder into Barthilas’ gut and sent the young
Paladin careening wildly off the platform. Barthilas landed with a loud thud and was nearly trampled by
the raging crowd.
 The hooded hangman rushed forward to overpower Tirion, but the former Paladin stood his ground.
Grabbing the hangman by the arm, Tirion flipped him over his shoulder and sent him tumbling down the
scaffolding’s steps. He could hear the knights and footmen charging up the steps behind him.They would
hang him for this, he thought frantically. Not even the Lightbringer himself could pardon Tirion for this
affront.
 As quickly as he could, Tirion ran over to Eitrigg and unfastened the noose around the orc’s neck. Left
too weak to stand, Eitrigg slumped heavily into Tirion’s arms. The orc barely recognized his savior’s
face.
 “Human?” Eitrigg mumbled questioningly. Tirion smiled down at him.
 “Yes, Eitrigg,” Tirion said. “It’s me.” Eitrigg shuddered in pain and exhaustion, but fixed Tirion with his
hazy gaze.
 “You must be crazy,” the old orc said. Tirion laughed to himself and nodded in agreement. He turned
just in time to see Barthilas climbing up over the edge of the scaffolding. Tirion knew that the knights and
footmen were only seconds away. Barthilas straightened and glowered at him.
 “Traitor! You have damned yourself this day!” the young Paladin screamed. The shocked crowd yelled
their assent and began throwing garbage at Tirion and Eitrigg both.
 Out of the corner of his eye, Tirion could see Lord Dathrohan looming in the background. Apparently,
he hadn’t left after all. The Lord Commander’s face was a mask of grief and revulsion. Tirion wished
there was some way to make his old friend understand that what he was doing, he was doing for honor’s
sake.
 Barthilas yelled for the knights to seize Tirion and the orc. As they approached, Tirion stretched out his
hand and commanded them to halt. He had spent his life leading men into battle and his deep voice still
carried the weight of command. Many of the knights who had served under him previously found
themselves cowed by his presence. Tirion faced them boldly.
 “Hear me!” Tirion shouted. His voice boomed out over the crowd and reverberated against the
surrounding structures. Many of the onlookers fell strangely silent. “This orc has done you no harm! He is
old and infirm. His death would accomplish nothing!” The honorable knights paused for a moment,
considering Tirion’s protests.
 “But it’s an orc! Are we not at war with its kind?” one of the knights yelled incredulously. Tirion steadied
himself and tightened his grip on Eitrigg.
 “We may very well be! But this one’s warlike days are over!” Tirion said. “There is no honor in hanging
such a defenseless creature.” He saw that a few of the knights nodded reluctantly. The rest of the
onlookers remained to be convinced. They continued to jeer and call Tirion an orc-loving traitor.
 “You’re not fit to even speak of honor, Tirion,” Barthilas spat angrily. “You’re a traitorous mongrel who
deserves to die right beside that inhuman beast!”
 Tirion tensed. Barthilas’ words hit him like a slap in the face. “I took a vow, long ago, to protect the
weak and defenseless,” Tirion said through gritted teeth, “and I intend to do just that. You see, boy,
that’s what it truly means to be a Paladin—knowing the difference between right and wrong and being
able to separate justice from vengeance. You’ve never been able to make those distinctions, have you,
Barthilas?” Tirion asked. Barthilas nearly choked with rage.
 Above the din of the shouting crowd, a single beating drum boomed out loud and clear. Eitrigg’s weary
head jerked up suddenly. He scanned the square’s periphery as if he expected to see a familiar sight,
then bowed his head again. Tirion looked at the orc questioningly, certain that the orc recognized the
strange beat. A few of the onlookers turned to see where the drumming was coming from, but Barthilas
paid it no mind. The young Paladin stepped toward Tirion with his fists clenched.
 “Have you forgotten so soon, Tirion? You’re no longer a Paladin! You’re a disgrace—an exile! It
doesn’t make any difference what you think or believe!” Barthilas yelled.
 “Damn it, Barthilas, you’ve got to open your eyes!” Tirion said urgently. “After all the years I ruled over
Hearthglen, the one thing I’m absolutely certain of is that war begets only war! If we can’t master our
own hatreds, then this senseless conflict will never cease! There will never be a future for our people!”
 Barthilas laughed contemptuously in Tirion’s face.
 The strange drumming sound grew louder and was joined by newer, stronger drums. At that point most
of the onlookers became aware of the ominous beating of the drums as well. They were startled to note
that the unnerving sounds were getting closer. The few women and children who were present began to
cover their ears and huddle together in fear and confusion. The attendant guards moved to the edges of
the square, searching for whatever was causing the incessant drumming.
 “The future of our people is no longer your concern,” Barthilas said coldly. “I rule Hearthglen now,
Tirion. And as long as I do, I swear that there will never be peace with the orcs! On my parents’
departed souls, I swear that every last orc in Lordaeron will burn for what they’ve done!”
 Tirion was shocked by Barthilas’ words. There was no reasoning with the young Paladin. He had given
over completely to his rage and grief.
 The mighty drums thundered all around the panicked square as Barthilas ordered his troops to strike.
 “Kill the orc now! Kill them both!” he yelled in fury. His roar was cut short as a crude, razor-sharp
spear tore through his chest. Barthilas’ blood splattered across the gallows as a legion of shadowy
shapes leapt down into the square from the surrounding rooftops. Furious, high-pitched war cries filled
the air as the savage orcs waded into the unsuspecting defenders of Stratholme. The mighty war-drums
thundered through the panic-gripped square.
 
 Tirion sat stunned as Barthilas slumped to the ground in a heap. Instinctively, he reached out to help the
young Paladin, but Barthilas spat at him and waved him off.
 “You’ve brought this down upon us,” the young Paladin said shakily as blood poured from his mouth.
His wild, hate-filled eyes locked on Tirion. “I always knew you’d betray . . .” was all he managed before
he fell facedown on the blood-soaked scaffolding. The crude orcish spear stuck up from his back like a
ship’s mast.
 Tirion immediately snapped to attention. He threw down the sledgehammer and hauled Eitrigg up on his
feet. Leaning the heavy orc on his shoulder, Tirion led Eitrigg away from the gallows. Tirion couldn’t
imagine how the orcish force had bypassed the city’s outer defenses. Typically, the orcs had always
assaulted their targets head-on. Yet, as he watched the battle unfold around him, he saw that the stealthy
orcs were using the rooftops and surrounding catwalks to their advantage.
 Knights and footmen ran forward to meet the orcish onslaught as all hell erupted in the public square.
Tirion kept his head down and headed for the side street he had used earlier. The sounds of clashing steel
and the combatants’ furious shouts of rage and pain mixed, creating a maddening din above Stratholme.
Tirion tried to shut out the noise and concentrate on staying alive. All around him was a killing ground.
Mighty orc warriors hacked at their enemies with great war axes while others hurled long, wicked spears
with startling precision. A few orcs, garbed in what looked like wolf furs, charged forward and lifted their
hands to the heavens. Before Tirion knew what they were doing, lightning arced down from the darkened
sky and struck the front ranks of the human force. Charred human bodies and large chunks of stone flew
through the air and rained down upon the chaotic battlefield. Stunned by the savage elemental attack, the
remaining human ranks were forced to pull back before the orcs’ awesome wrath.
 Tirion was surprised to see that the orcs were working in unison to outmaneuver and flank the frayed
human defenders. To his memory, orcs had never been so singularly united in battle. Despite their
apparent cunning and skill, the orcs’ numbers were few. Tirion wondered what the orcs were after,
recklessly attacking a defended human city with such an insubstantial force. Soon every soldier in
Stratholme would be bearing down on the square.The outnumbered orcs wouldn’t stand a chance
against a fully armored garrison, he thought.
 Despite the chaos around him, Tirion managed to reach the edge of the square and escape down a small
alley. Hefting Eitrigg’s deadweight up once more, Tirion turned to take a last look at the ensuing carnage.
He caught sight of an enormous orc, dressed in a full suit of black plate armor. The orc carried a mighty
warhammer that resembled those used by the Paladins—except for the fact that the orc’s hammer
seemed to be ignited by living lightning. The dark orc waded his way through the ardent human defenders
as if they were harmless children. It smashed and battered everyone that came near it with a calm
lethality—all the while shouting sharp commands to its warriors. For a moment, Tirion could only watch
in amazement and horror. The mighty orc leader was unlike any he had witnessed before. Tirion snapped
out of his daze and hurriedly made his way out of the beleaguered city with Eitrigg in his arms.
 
 With a supreme effort, Tirion succeeded in hauling Eitrigg out of the city and into the surrounding woods.
Looking back, he could see that a number of fires had been started in various parts of the city. He could
hear screams and clashing weapons even from this distance. Apparently the cunning orcs were attempting
to distract and divide the human forces. Tirion noted that whoever the orcs’ leader was, he was far more
clever than any chieftain he’d ever heard of.
 Wearily, Tirion laid Eitrigg down on the leafy ground and crouched next to him. He tried to calm himself
and think clearly about the situation. He couldn’t account for the orcs’ unprecedented attack on the city,
and wondered if the creatures had come to free Eitrigg, just as he had. Whatever the case, he was glad
that they’d come. He was genuinely sorry to see so many of his brethren fall before the orcs, but at least
he’d accomplished what he’d set out to do. Eitrigg was alive. And, as frayed and thin as it was, Tirion’s
precious honor was still intact.
 Eitrigg lay silently on the matted forest floor. Tirion bent down to check the orc’s pulse. Hopefully the
orc was just exhausted from his trying ordeal, he mused. Gasping in panic, Tirion realized that Eitrigg’s
heart had stopped. The beating the humans had given the orc had obviously done serious internal
damage. If he didn’t do something quickly, he knew that Eitrigg would die. Instinctively, he placed his
hands on Eitrigg’s chest and prayed for the healing powers of the Light to wash over the battered orc.
Surely he was still strong enough to heal even these grievous wounds?
 Slowly, a feeling of dread spread through Tirion’s heart. Nothing was happening. He bowed his head in
defeat, remembering that he had been excommunicated from the Light.This can’t be happening, he
thought miserably. He could almost sense Eitrigg’s life ebbing away into nothingness.
 “No!” Tirion growled in hopelessness. “You will not die, Eitrigg! Do you hear me? You will not die on
me!” he yelled at the comatose orc. Once again he slapped his hands on the orc’s chest and
concentrated with all of his will.“By the grace of the Light, may your brethren be healed.” The
phrase wafted through his mind repeatedly as he reached deep for the power that lurked somewhere
within his spirit.“In its grace he will be made anew.”
 The Light could not be taken from him, he insisted. Men could strip him of his armor and titles, they
could take away his home and his wealth—but the Light would always been within him.It had to be.
 Slowly, Tirion felt a searing heat rising within his body. It filled his center with strength and light that
snaked out toward his limbs. He almost cried out in joy as the familiar energies raced through his hands
and engulfed the orc’s ravaged body. Tirion felt as if he were floating on air. The strength and purity of
the Light flooded his being and cascaded out through his body like a halo of holy fire. Awed and humbled
by the reawakened power, Tirion opened his eyes and saw that a warm, golden glow had enveloped
Eitrigg. He watched in amazement as the bruises on the orc’s body healed before his very eyes. Even the
infected laceration on the orc’s leg sealed up as if it had never been.
 The soothing energies subsided and Tirion dropped to the ground in exhaustion. He lay there for a few
moments panting, attempting to keep his head from spinning. With a snort, Eitrigg sat up and looked
around frantically. The old orc was pale and obviously weak, but his eyes were bright and alert. Eitrigg
quickly sprung up in a defensive crouch and sniffed the air. He scanned the immediate tree line for any
signs of danger and seemed to find none. Eitrigg looked down and saw Tirion lying near him. He shifted
back on his haunches doubtfully and stared at the exhausted human with surprise.
 “Human?” Eitrigg asked. “What’s happened? How did we get here?” Tirion got to his knees and patted
the orc reassuringly on the shoulder.
 “We’re outside the city, Eitrigg,” Tirion said evenly. “You’re safe for the time being. If we’re both very
lucky, there’ll be no more hangings in our immediate future.” Eitrigg grunted and looked at Tirion
doubtfully. He glanced down at his big green hands and traced his fingers over where his wounds had
been.
 “This power you have, human,” the orc began, “did it heal my wounds?”
 Tirion nodded. “Yes. You told me before that pain is a good teacher. Well, you were about to have
your final lesson. It would have been a rough one, I think,” Tirion said jokingly.
 Eitrigg grinned and slapped Tirion on the back. “Perhaps I’ve studied enough, after all,” the orc replied
wryly. The old orc coughed a few times and eased himself back down to a sitting position. The strain of
the past few days proved to be too much for his tired old body, and he passed out in a heap. Although
he was healed, Tirion knew from experience that the orc would be weak for days.
 He was surprised to hear a sudden rustling in the dense branches and undergrowth all around him.
Looking around frantically, he braced himself for danger. Slowly—ominously—the shadows of the trees
began to move and shift in every direction. Huge, dark shapes took form and moved forward, encircling
the sleeping orc and the nervous human.
 Twelve in all, the creatures wore loose armor plates and tattered leathers that covered only the most vital
areas of their muscular, green-skinned bodies. Feathers, multiple tribal trinkets and bone necklaces
adorned the mighty orcish warriors who emerged with catlike grace from the shadowy tree line. Their
bulging arms and bestial, tusked faces were marked by jagged, primitive tattoos that augmented their
already feral appearance. They carried broad-bladed axes and heavy warblades with such practiced
ease that the weapons appeared to be natural extensions of their bodies. Tirion was overwhelmed by the
orcs’ savage presence. He was most disconcerted to see the change in their beady eyes—no longer
were the orcs’ eyes ablaze with depravity and hate; they were cool and alert, showing an intelligence and
wit that he could scarcely credit to them.
 Tirion held his breath and made sure not to make any sudden moves. For all he knew, the orcs might
think that he had attacked Eitrigg somehow. The orcs simply stood, staring at the two on the ground as if
waiting for a command. Panic grated across Tirion’s nerves. After all he had tried to do, he’d be damned
if he just let himself be hacked to bits in the wilds. Yet no matter what he tried, he knew that he’d last less
than a minute against such fierce warriors.
 Suddenly, a larger form emerged from behind the warriors. A number of the orcs stepped aside silently
as their leader made his way forward. Tirion gasped. It was the orc chieftain he had seen during the
battle. Being this close, Tirion could see that the gargantuan orc’s black plate armor was trimmed with
bronze runic inscriptions. Never before had Tirion ever seen an orc in full armor. The sight was both
impressive and chilling. The orc’s mighty stone warhammer seemed to be as old as the world itself. The
creature’s black hair was tied into long braids that hung down over its armored torso. Its green face was
somewhat less bestial than the other orcs’, and its fierce, intelligent eyes were a striking blue. Tirion knew
that this was no ordinary orc.
 The mighty creature stepped forward and kneeled down beside Eitrigg. Tirion tensed. He remembered
that Eitrigg had abandoned his duties as an orcish warrior.Perhaps these orcs had come to punish
him?
 Fighting back his fear, Tirion inched forward, intending to defend Eitrigg if necessary. The large orc gave
Tirion a fierce, threatening glare – warning the human to stay put and remain silent. Surrounded as he was
by the chieftain’s guards, Tirion was forced to comply with the orc’s silent command. Seeing that he
would be obeyed, the mysterious orc placed his large hand on Eitrigg’s head and closed his eyes,
concentrating. Eitrigg’s eyes fluttered open and focused on the dark orc looming over him. The
mysterious orc’s features softened slightly.
 “You are Eitrigg of the Blackrock clan, are you not?” the orc asked in the human tongue. Tirion raised
his eyebrows in surprise.Did all of the orcs speak so clearly? he wondered.
 Shakily, Eitrigg looked around at the other orcs and nodded his weary head. “I am he,” he said in a low
tone.
 The larger orc nodded and straightened. “I thought so. It’s taken me a long time to track you down, old
one,” he said evenly.
 Eitrigg sat up and looked upon the larger orc intently. “Your face is familiar to me, warrior. But you are
far too young to be . . .” Eitrigg studied the orc’s strong features for a moment and said, “Who are you?”
 The orc nodded slightly and stood up to his full height. The gathered orcs seemed to straighten and lift
their chins high as their leader spoke. “I am known as Thrall, old one. I am Warchief of the Horde,” he
said proudly. Eitrigg’s jaw dropped wide open. Tirion stared in awe. This, obviously, was the upstart
Warchief of which Dathrohan had spoken.
 “I have heard of you,” Tirion said, his voice heavy with contempt. He saw the surrounding orc guards
stiffen and ready their weapons. Apparently they didn’t take well to their leader being insulted. The orc
turned to stare at the former Paladin in surprise. “And what exactly have you heard, human?”
 Tirion held the orc’s fierce gaze. “I have heard that you plan to rebuild the Horde and renew your war
against my people,” he said coolly.
 “You are partially correct,” Thrall began, with mild amusement evident in his tone. “Iam rebuilding the
Horde. You can be sure that my people will not remain in chains for long. However, I have no interest in
making war for war’s sake. Those dark days are over.”
 “Those days are over?” Tirion asked skeptically. “I just watched as you and your warriors hacked your
way through Stratholme.”
 Thrall met the human’s accusing stare levelly. “You presume much, human. We only attacked the city to
reclaim one of our own. Times have changed. Your kingdoms and your people mean nothing to me. I
seek only to finish my father’s work and find a new homeland for my people,” Thrall replied evenly.
 Eitrigg’s eyes were wide with sudden recognition. “Your father’s work?” he sputtered excitedly. “I knew
I recognized your face, warrior! You are the son of Durotan!” Thrall merely nodded once, never taking
his piercing eyes off Tirion. Eitrigg was beside himself with joy.
 “Could it be, after all these years?” he asked, flabbergasted. He looked around at the orcs’ faces,
searching for further confirmation. Their proud, stone-like faces revealed nothing.
 Thrall turned his back on Tirion and knelt beside Eitrigg. “I have come to bring you home, old one,” he
said warmly. “I’m sorry it took us so long to find you, but we’ve been somewhat busy these past months.
I have already freed a number of clans, but I need wise veterans like you to help me teach them of the
old ways. Your people have need of you again, brave Eitrigg.”
 The old orc shook his head in shocked disbelief. He stared into Thrall’s sharp blue eyes and found hope
within their shining depths. After years of dispirited isolation, his heart was filled with pride again. Slowly,
Eitrigg began to believe that there could be a future for his people after all.
 “I will follow you, son of Durotan,” Eitrigg said proudly. “I will help heal our people in any way that I
can.” Thrall nodded once and placed his hand on the old orc’s shoulder.
 Casting a sidelong glance at the surrounding guards, Tirion cautiously stood up and faced Thrall. “Eitrigg
told me of your father—and of his fate. He must have been a great hero to elicit such devotion from his
son.”
 Thrall’s face was expressionless as he replied, “My people have always held that it is a son’s duty to
finish his father’s work.” Tirion nodded sadly. He wondered if Taelan would ever share that sentiment.
Probably not, he concluded.What boy would ever be proud of having a disgraced exile as a father?
More than likely, Taelan would only revile me for what I’ve done.
 Thrall motioned toward Eitrigg and shouted a number of short guttural commands in the orcish tongue.
Tirion looked around as the guards moved forward, unsure as to what to expect.Would the orcs kill
him? Would they let him go? A number of warriors knelt down beside Eitrigg and hooked their arms
under his shoulders. Tirion looked back at Thrall, questioningly.
 The young Warchief smirked knowingly and said, “You risked your life to save our brother, human. We
have no quarrel with you. You are free to go, so long as you do not follow us.”
 Tirion exhaled in relief and watched as the orc warriors gently gathered Eitrigg up. Thrall gave Tirion an
orcish salute and, without a second glance, turned to leave. Many of the orcs had already disappeared
back into the densely shadowed woods. Tirion shook his head as if in a daze. A strong hand grabbed
hold of his arm. He looked down and saw that it was Eitrigg. The old orc had a look of peace and
fulfillment upon his gnarled face.
 “We are both bound by blood and honor,brother. I will not forget you,” Eitrigg said.
 Tirion smiled and raised his hand to his heart as the orcs led Eitrigg away. He stood for a moment,
watching them go. The sounds of battle still echoed from within Stratholme’s walls. He decided that he
had better make himself scarce before the human troops arrived.
 With a silent prayer to the Light, Tirion Fordring turned his back on Stratholme and set out to find solace
within the perilous, uncharted wildlands of Lordaeron.
 EIGHT
 A Perfect Circle
 Sunlight cascaded down through the open skylight in the cathedral’s vaulted ceiling. Twenty-year-old
Taelan Fordring stood upon an ornately carved dais and basked in the warmth and splendor of the holy
Light. Large silver plates of armor adorned his broad shoulders. Beneath the plates, a carefully
embroidered dark blue stole hung from his neck and streamed down his chest. He held a mighty,
two-handed silver warhammer in his hands which, he was told, had once belonged to his father.
 Taelan was a strong, handsome young man. Bathed in the Light as he was, he seemed almost
transcendent. An aged Archbishop stood before Taelan holding a large, leather-bound tome. The old
man had the light of joy in his eyes as he addressed Taelan.
 “Do you, Taelan Fordring, vow to uphold the honor and codes of the Order of the Silver Hand?” he
asked.
 “I do,” Taelan replied sincerely.
 “Do you vow to walk in the grace of the Light and spread its wisdom to your fellow man?”
 “I do,” Taelan said shakily. He was overcome with a thousand different emotions at once and had to
fight to get a grip on himself. This was the moment he had waited for as long as he could remember. He
glanced around quickly and saw his mother standing proudly in attendance.
 Though years of hardship and loneliness had streaked her soft, golden hair with silver strands, Karandra
was as beautiful and radiant as she had ever been. She marveled at seeing Taelan being anointed as a
Paladin. She wished that Tirion could have been present to see his son follow in his footsteps.
 “Do you vow to vanquish evil wherever it be found, and protect the weak and innocent with your very
life?” the Archbishop asked Taelan in a ritualistic tone.
 Taelan swallowed hard and nodded while saying, “By my honor, I do.”
 The Archbishop continued to speak to the assembly but, overcome as he was, Taelan could not hear his
words. Oblivious to the ceremony proceeding around him, he reached into the pocket of his ceremonial
cassock and took hold of the rolled, tattered parchment that he always carried with him. It was the note
his father had left him before he was exiled from the kingdom. Taelan couldn’t count how many times he
had read the tattered letter over the years, but he had memorized every line, every subtle stroke of the
quill. He recalled one of the last passages in his mind.
 My dear Taelan,
 By the time you’re old enough to read this, I will have been gone a long time. I can’t adequately
express how painful it is to have to leave you and your mother behind, but I suppose that
sometimes life forces you to make difficult decisions. I fear that you’ll no doubt hear many bad
things about me as you grow older—that people will look upon my actions and condemn them as
evil. I fear that others will look down upon you for the decisions I have made.
 I won’t try to explain everything that’s happened in this note, but I need you to know that what I
did, I did for honor’s sake. Honor is an important part of what makes us men, Taelan. Our words
and our deeds must count for something in this world. I know it’s asking a great deal, but I hope
that you will understand that someday.
 I want you to know that I love you dearly and that I’ll always carry you close to my heart.
 Your life and your deeds will be my redemption, son. You are my pride and my hope. Be a good
man. Be a hero.
 Goodbye.
 Taelan came out of his reverie just in time to hear the Archbishop say:
 “Then arise, Taelan Fordring—Paladin defender of Lordaeron. Welcome to the Order of the Silver
Hand.”
 Just as it had in his boyhood dreams, the entire assembly erupted in cheers. The joyous din echoed
throughout the vast cathedral, drowning out every other noise. His friends and comrades clapped and
hollered in congratulations. Almost everyone gathered in the cathedral was on their feet joining in the
revelry.
 Beaming with pride, Taelan turned and smiled warmly at his mother and his old friend, Arden, who
stood a few paces behind her. The aged guardsman, who had watched over and protected Taelan for
nearly fifteen years, smiled back proudly. Arden marveled at how much Taelan resembled his father. He
knew that Tirion would have been proud.
 The crowd surged up to congratulate Taelan and welcome him to the Order.
 Arden had turned to make his way toward the exit, when, out of the corner of his eye, he saw a familiar
figure moving through the crowd. The tall, nondescript figure wore a green, hooded travel-cloak and
weather-stained leathers. But Arden would have recognized the gray haired man’s piercing green eyes
anywhere. For a brief second, he locked eyes with the aged stranger.
 “Tirion,” Arden whispered under his breath.
 The stranger smiled knowingly at Arden and raised a stiff hand to his brow in salute. He then pulled his
hood low over his face and promptly slipped out the back of the cathedral.
 Looking back at Taelan, Arden said, “Like father, like son.”

There was a sluggishness to the magic in this room. It was a thick feeling, like stale air in a room that had
been shuttered for years. Khadgar tried to pull the energies together, but they seemed to resist, to follow
his desires with only the greatest reluctance.
 Khadgar’s face grew stern as he tried to pull more of the power of the room, the energies, into himself.
This was a simple spell. If anything, it should be easier in this spellroom, where such castings would be
commonplace. Suddenly the young mage was swamped with the thick, fetid feel of the magic. It fell upon
him in a thick blanket, crushing the spell and driving him physically to his knees. Despite himself, he cried
out.
 Medivh was at his side at once, helping the young mage to his feet. “There, there,” he said. “I didn’t
expect you to succeed even that well. Good try.”
 “What is it?” managed Khadgar, suddenly able to breathe again. “It was like nothing I’ve felt before.”
 “That’s good news for you, then,” said Medivh. “The magic has been twisted here, a result of what
happened earlier.”
 “You mean like a haunting?” said Khadgar. “Even in Karazhan, I never…”
 “No, not like that,” said Medivh. “Something much worse. The two dead mages here were summoning
demons. It’s that taint that you feel. A demon was here.”
 This book is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places and incidents are products of the author’s
imagination or are used fictitiously. Any resemblance to actual events or locales or persons living or dead
is entirely coincidental.
 AnOriginal Publication of POCKET BOOKS
 POCKET BOOKS, a division of Simon & Schuster, Inc. 1230 Avenue of the Americas, New
York, NY 10020
 Copyright © 2002 by Blizzard Entertainment. All rights reserved. Warcraft and Blizzard Entertainment
are trademarks or registered trademarks of Blizzard Entertainment in the U.S. and/or other countries. All
other trademarks are the property of their respective owners.
 All rights reserved, including the right to reproduce this book or portions thereof in any form whatsoever.
For information address Pocket Books, 1230 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10020
 ISBN: 0-7434-2314-3
 POCKET and colophon are registered trademarks of Simon & Schuster, Inc.
 Visit us on the World Wide Web:
http://www.SimonSays.com
 To Chris Metzen,
Who Kept the Vision
 THE LAST
GUARDIAN
 Prologue
 The Lonely Tower
 The larger of the two moons had risen first this evening, and now hung pregnant and silver-white against
a clear, star-dappled sky. Beneath the lambent moon the peaks of the Redridge Mountains strained for
the sky. In the daylight the sun picked out hues of magenta and rust among the great granite peaks, but in
the moonlight they were reduced to tall, proud ghosts. To the west lay the Forest of Elwynn, its heavy
canopy of greatoaks and satinwoods running from the foothills to the sea. To the east, the bleak swamp
of the Black Morass spread out, a land of marshes and low hills, bayous and backwaters, failed
settlements and lurking danger. A shadow passed briefly across the moon, a raven-sized shadow,
bearing for a hole in the heart of the mountain.
 Here a chunk had been pulled from the fastness of the Redridge Range, leaving behind a circular vale.
Once it might have been the site of some primeval celestial impact or the memory of an earth-shaking
explosion, but the aeons had worn the bowl-shaped crater into a series of steep-edged, rounded hillocks
which were now cradled by the steeped mountains surrounding them. None of the ancient trees of
Elwynn could reach its altitude, and the interior of the ringed hills was barren save for weeds and tangled
vines.
 At the center of the ringed hills lay a bare tor, as bald as the pate of a Kul Tiras merchant lord. Indeed
the very way the hillock rose steeply, than gentled to a near-level slope at its apex, was similar in shape
to a human skull. Many had noted it over the years, though only a few had been sufficiently brave, or
powerful, or tactless to mention it to the property’s owner.
 At the flattened peak of the tor rose an ancient tower, a thick, massive protrusion of white stone and
dark mortar, a man-made eruption that shot effortlessly into the sky, scaling higher than the surrounding
hills, lit like a beacon by the moonlight. There was a low wall at the base of the tower surrounding a
bailey, and within those walls the tumbledown remains of a stable and a smithy, but the tower itself
dominated all within the ringed hills.
 Once this place was called Karazhan. Once it was home of the last of the mysterious and secretive
Guardians of Tirisfal. Once it was a living place. Now it was simply abandoned and timelost.
 There was silence upon the tower but not a stillness. In the night’s embrace quiet shapes flitted from
window to window, and phantoms danced along the balconies and parapets. Less than ghosts, but more
than memories, these were nothing less than pieces of the past that had become unstuck from the flow of
time. These shadows of the past had been pried loose by the madness of the tower’s owner, and were
now condemned to play out their histories again and again, in the silence of the abandoned tower.
Condemned to play but denied of any audience to appreciate them.
 Then in the silence, there was the soft scrape of a booted foot against stone, then another. A flash of
movement beneath the lambent moon, a shadow against the white stone, a flutter of a tattered, red-hued
cloak in the cool night air. A figure walked along the topmost parapet, on the crenellated uppermost spire
that years before had served as an observatory.
 The parapet door into the observatory screeched open on ancient hinges, then stopped, frozen by rust
and the passage of time. The cloaked figure paused a moment, then placed a finger on the hinge, and
muttered a few choice words. The door swung open silently, the hinges made as if new. The trespasser
allowed himself a smile.
 The observatory was empty now, what tools that remained smashed and abandoned. The trespassing
figure, almost as silent as a ghost himself, picked up a crushed astrolabe, its scale twisted in some
now-forgotten rage. Now it is merely a heavy piece of gold, inert and useless in his hands.
 There was other movement in the observatory, and the trespasser looked up. Now a ghostly figure
stood nearby, near one of the many windows. The ghost/non-ghost was an broad-shouldered man, hair
and beard once dark but now going to a premature gray at the edges. The figure was one of the shards
of the past, unglued and now repeating its task, regardless of whether it had observers or not. For the
moment, the dark-haired man held the astrolabe, the unbroken twin to the one in the trespasser’s hands,
and fiddled with a small knob along one side. A moment, a check, and a twitch of the knob. His dark
brows furrowed over ghostly green eyes. A second moment, another check, and another twitch. Finally,
the tall, imposing figure sighed deeply and placed the astrolabe on a table that was no longer there, and
vanished.
 The trespasser nodded. Such hauntings were common even in the days when Karazhan was inhabited,
though now, stripped of the control (and the madness) of their master, they had become more brazen.
Yet these shards of the past belonged here, while he did not. He was the interloper, not they.
 The trespasser crossed the room to its staircase leading down, while behind him the older man flickered
back into the view and repeated his action, sighting his astrolabe on a planet that had long since moved to
other parts of the sky.
 The trespasser moved down through the tower, crossing levels to reach other stairs and other hallways.
No door was shut to him, even those locked and bolted, or sealed by rust and age. A few words, a
touch, a gesture and the fetters flew loose, the rust dissolved into ruddy piles, the hinges restored. In one
or two places ancient wards still glowed, potent despite their age. He paused before them for a moment,
considering, reflecting, searching his memory for the correct counter-sign. He spoke the correct word,
made the correct motion with his hands, shattered the weak magic that remained, and passed on.
 As he moved through the tower, the phantoms of the past grew more agitated and more active. Now
with a potential audience, it seemed that these pieces of the past wished to play themselves out, if only to
be made free of this place. Any sound they once possessed had long-since eroded away, leaving only
their images moving through the halls.
 The interloper passed an ancient butler in dark livery, the frail old man shuffling slowly down the empty
hallway, carrying a silver tray and wearing a set of horse-blinders. The interloper passed through the
library, where a green-fleshed young woman stood with her back to him, pouring over an ancient tome.
He passed through a banquet hall, at one end a group of musicians playing soundlessly, dancers twirling
in a gavotte. At the other end a great city burned, its flames beating ineffectively against the stone walls
and rotting tapestries. The trespasser moved through the silent flames, but his face grew drawn and tense
as he witnessed once more the mighty city of Stormwind burn around him.
 In one room three young men sat around a table and told now-unknown lies. Metal mugs were scattered
on the table’s surface as well as beneath it. The trespasser stood watching this image for a long time, until
a phantom taverness brought another round. Then he shook his head and pressed on.
 He reached nearly the ground level, and stepped out on a low balcony that hung precariously to the wall,
like a wasps’ nest over the main entrance. There, in the wide space before the tower, between the main
entrance and a now-collapsed stables across the bailey, stood a single ghostly image, lonely and
separated. It did not move like the others, but rather stood there, waiting, tentative. A piece of the past
that had not been released. A piece that was waiting for him.
 The immobile image was of a young man with a skunk stripe of white running through his dark, untidy
head of hair. The straggling fragments of a beard, newly grown, clung to his face. A battered rucksack
lay at the youth’s feet, and he held a red-sealed letter with a deathlike grip.
 This was well and truly no ghost, the trespasser knew, though the owner of this image may yet be dead,
fallen in combat beneath a foreign sun. This was a memory, a shard of the past, trapped like an insect in
amber, waiting for its release. Waiting for his arrival.
 The trespasser sat on the stonework ledge of the balcony and looked out, beyond the bailey, beyond the
hillock, and beyond the ringed hills. There was silence in the moonlight, as the mountains themselves
seemed to be holding their breath, waiting for him.
 The trespasser lifted a hand and intoned a series of chanted words. Softly came the rhymes and rhythms
the first time, then louder, and finally louder still, shattering the calm. In the distance wolves picked up his
chant and cast it back in howling counterpoint.
 And the image of the ghostly youth, its feet seemingly trapped in mud, took a deep breath, hoisted his
rucksack of secrets to his shoulder, and slogged his way toward the main entrance of Medivh’s Tower.
 One
 Karazhan
 Khadgar clutched the crimson-sealed letter of introduction and desperately tried to remember his own
name. He had ridden for days, accompanying various caravans, and finally making the journey alone to
Karazhan through the vast, overgrown, woods of Elwynn. Then the long climb into the heights of the
mountains, to this serene, empty, lonely place. Even the air felt cold and apart. Now, sore and tired, the
scruffy-bearded young man stood in the gathering dusk of the courtyard, petrified of what he now must
do.
 Introduce himself to the most powerful mage of Azeroth.
 An honor, the scholars of the Kirin Tor had said. An opportunity, they insisted, that was not to be
missed. Khadgar’s sage mentors, a conclave of influential scholars and sorcerers, told him they had been
trying to insinuate a sympathetic ear in the tower of Karazhan for years. The Kirin Tor wanted to learn
what knowledge the most powerful wizard in the land had hidden away in his library. They wanted to
know what research he favored. And most of all they wanted this maverick mage to start planning for his
legacy, wanted to know when the great and powerful Medivh planned to train an heir.
 The Great Medivh and the Kirin Tor had been at loggerheads on these and other matters for years,
apparently, and only now did he relent to some of their entreaties. Only now would he take on an
apprentice. Whether it was from a softening of the wizard’s reportedly hard heart, or mere diplomatic
concession, or a feeling of the mage’s own creeping mortality, it did not matter to Khadgar’s masters.
The simple truth was that this powerful independent (and to Khadgar, mysterious) wizard had asked for
an assistant, and the Kirin Tor, which ruled over the magical kingdom of Dalaran, were more than happy
to comply.
 So the youth Khadgar was selected and shuttled off with a list of directions, orders, counter-orders,
requests, suggestions, advice, and other demands from his sorcerous masters. Ask Medivh about his
mother’s battles with demons, asked Guzbah, his first instructor. Find out all you can about elven history
from his library, requested Lady Delth. Check his volumes for any bestiaries, commanded Alonda, who
was convinced that there was a fifth species of troll as yet un-recorded in her own volumes. Be direct,
forthright, and honest, advised Norlan the Chief Artificer—the Great Magus Medivh seemed to value
those traits. Be diligent and do what you’re told. Don’t slouch. Always seem interested. Stand up
straight. And above all, keep your ears and eyes open.
 The ambitions of the Kirin Tor did not bother Khadgar horribly—his upbringing in Dalaran and his early
apprenticeship to the conclave made it clear to him that his mentors were insatiably curious about magic
in all its forms. Their continual accumulation, cataloging, and definition of magic were imprinted on young
students at an early age, and Khadgar was no different than most.
 Indeed, he realized, his own curiosity may have accounted for his current plight. His own nocturnal
wanderings through the halls of the Violet Citadel of Dalaran had uncovered more than a few secrets that
the conclave would rather not have noised about. The Chief Artificer’s fondness for flamewine, for
example, or Lady Delth’s preference for young cavaliers a slender fraction of her age, or Korrigan the
Librarian’s secret collection of pamphlets describing (in lurid fashion) the practices of historical
demon-worshipers.
 And there was something about one of the great sages of Dalaran, venerable Arrexis, one of the gray
eminences that even the others respected. He had disappeared, or died, or something horrible had
happened, and the others chose to make no mention of it, even to the point of excising Arrexis’s name
from the volumes and not speaking of him again. But Khadgar had found out, nonetheless. Khadgar had
a way of finding the necessary reference, making the needed connection, or talking to the right person at
the right time. It was a gift and may yet prove to be a curse.
 Any one of these discoveries could have resulted in his drawing this prestigious (and for all the planning
and warnings, potentially fatal) assignment. Perhaps they thought young Khadgar was a littletoo good at
ferreting out secrets—easier for the conclave to send him somewhere where his curiosity would do some
good for the Kirin Tor. Or at least put him far enough away so he wasn’t finding things out about the
other natives of the Violet Citadel.
 And Khadgar, through his relentless eavesdropping, had heardthat theory as well.
 So Khadgar set out with a rucksack filled with notes, a heart filled with secrets, and a head filled with
strong demands and useless advice. In the final week before leaving Dalaran, he had heard from nearly
every member of the conclave, each of whom was interested in something about Medivh. For a wizard
living on the butt-end of nowhere, surrounded by trees and ominous peaks, the members of the Kirin Tor
were extremely curious about him. Urgent, even.
 Taking a deep breath (and in doing so reminding himself that he still was too close to the stables),
Khadgar strode forward toward the tower itself, his feet feeling like he was pulling his pack-pony along
by his ankles.
 The main entrance yawned like a cavern’s mouth, without gate or portcullis. That made sense, for what
army would fight its way through the Forest of Elwynn to top the rounded walls of the crater, all to fight
the Magus Medivh himself? There was no record of anyone or anything even attempting to besiege
Karazhan.
 The shadowed entrance was tall enough to let an elephant in full livery pass beneath. Overhanging it
slightly was a wide balcony with a balustrade of white stone. From that perch one would be level with the
surrounding hills and gain a view of the mountains beyond. There was a flicker of motion along the
balustrade, a bit of movement that Khadgarfelt more than actually witnessed. A robed figure, perhaps,
moving back along the balcony into the tower itself. Was he being watched even now? Was there no one
to greet him, or was he expected to brave the tower on his own?
 “You are the New Young Man?” said a soft, almost sepulchral voice, and Khadgar, his head still craned
upward, nearly jumped out of his skin. He wheeled to see a stooped, thin figure emerge out of the
shadows of the entranceway.
 The stooped thing looked marginally human, and for a moment Khadgar wondered if Medivh was
mutating forest animals to work as his servants. This one looked like a hairless weasel, its long face was
framed by what looked like a pair of black rectangles.
 Khadgar didn’t remember making any response, but the weasel person stepped farther from the
shadows, and repeated itself.
 “You are the New Young Man?” it said. Each word was enunciated with its own breath, encapsulated in
its own little box, capitalized and separate from the others. It stepped from the shadows fully and
revealed itself as nothing more or less threatening than a whip-slender elderly man in dark worsted livery.
A servant—human, but a servant. It, or rather he, was still wearing black rectangles on the sides of his
head, like a set of earmuffs, that extended forward to his most prominent nose.
 The youth realized that he was staring at the old man, “Khadgar,” he said, then after a moment presented
the tightly held letter of introduction. “Of Dalaran. Khadgar of Dalaran, in the kingdom of Lordaeron. I
was sent by the Kirin Tor. From the Violet Citadel. I am Khadgar of the Kirin Tor. From the Violet
Citadel. Of Dalaran. In Lordaeron.” He felt like he was casting conversational stones into a great, empty
well, hoping that the old man would respond to any of them.
 “Of course you are, Khadgar,” said the old man. “Of the Kirin Tor. Of the Violet Citadel. Of Dalaran.
Of Lordaeron.” The servant took the proffered letter as if the document were a live reptile and, after
smoothing out its crumpled edges, tucked it inside his livery vest without opening it. After carrying and
protecting it for so many miles, Khadgar felt a pain of loss. The letter of introduction represented his
future, and he was loath to see it disappear, even for a moment.
 “The Kirin Tor sent me to assist Medivh. Lord Medivh. The Wizard Medivh. Medivh of Karazhan,”
Khadgar realized he was but a half-step from collapsing into a full-fledged babble, and with a definitive
effort tightly clamped his mouth shut.
 “I’m sure they did,” said the servant. “Send you, that is.” He appraised the seal on the letter, and a thin
hand dipped into his waistcoat, pulling out a set of black rectangles bound by a thin band of metal.
“Blinders?”
 Khadgar blinked. “No. I mean, no thank you.”
 “Moroes,” said the servant.
 Khadgar shook his head.
 “I am Moroes,” the servant said. “Steward of the Tower. Castellan to Medivh. Blinders?” Again he
raised the black rectangles, twins to those that framed his narrow face.
 “No thank you…Moroes,” said Khadgar, his face twisted in curiosity.
 The servant turned and motioned that Khadgar follow with a weak wave of the arm.
 Khadgar picked up his rucksack and had to lope forward to catch up with the servant. For all his
supposed fragility the steward moved at a good clip.
 “Are you alone in the tower?” Khadgar ventured as they started climbing a curved set of wide, low
stairs. The stone dipped in the center, worn by myriad feet of passing servants and guests.
 “Eh?” responded the servant.
 “Are you alone?” repeated Khadgar, wondering if he would be reduced to speaking as Moroes spoke
in order to be understood. “Do you live here by yourself?”
 “The Magus is here,” responded Moroes in a wheezing voice that sounded as faint and as fatal as grave
dust.
 “Yes, of course,” said Khadgar.
 “Wouldn’t be much point for you to be here if he wasn’t,” continued the steward. “Here, that is.”
Khadgar wondered if the old man’s voice sounded that way because it was not used that often.
 “Of course,” agreed Khadgar. “Anyone else?”
 “You, now,” continued Moroes. “More work to take care of two than one. Not that I was consulted.”
 “So just you and the Wizard, then, normally?” said Khadgar, wondering if the steward had been hired
(or created) for his taciturn nature.
 “And Cook,” said Moroes, “Though Cook doesn’t talk much. Thank you for asking, though.”
 Khadgar tried to restrain himself from rolling his eyes, but failed. He hoped that the blinders on either
side of the steward’s face kept the servant from seeing his response.
 They reached a level spot, a cross-hallway lit by torches. Moroes crossed immediately to another set of
saddle-worn, curving stairs opposite them. Khadgar paused for a moment to examine the torches. He
raised a hand mere inches from the flickering flame, but felt no heat. Khadgar wondered if the cold flame
was common throughout the tower. In Dalaran they used phosphorescent crystals, which beamed with a
steady, constant glow, though his research spoke of reflective mirrors, elemental spirits bound within
lanterns, and in one case, huge captive fireflies. Yet these flames seemed to be frozen in place.
 Moroes, half-mounted up the next staircase, slowly turned and let out a gasping cough. Khadgar hurried
to catch up. Apparently the blinders did not limit the old steward that much.
 “Why the blinders?” Khadgar asked.
 “Eh?” replied Moroes.
 Khadgar touched the side of his head. “The blinders. Why?”
 Moroes twisted his face in what Khadgar could only assume was a smile. “Magic’s strong here. Strong,
and wrong, sometimes. You see…things…around here. Unless you’re careful. I’m careful. Other
visitors, the ones before you, they were less careful. They’re gone now.”
 Khadgar thought of the phantom he may or may not have seen on the overhanging balcony, and nodded.
 “Cook has a set of rose-quartz lenses,” added Moroes. “Swears by them.” He paused for a moment,
then added, “Cook is a bit foolish that way.”
 Khadgar hoped that Moroes would be more chatty once he was warmed up. “So, you’ve been in the
Magus’s household for long?”
 “Eh?” said Moroes again.
 “You’ve been with Medivh long?” Khadgar said, hoping to keep the impatience out of his voice.
 “Ayep,” said the steward. “Long enough. Too long. Seems like years. Time’s like that here.” The
weathered steward let his voice trail off and the two climbed in silence.
 “What do you know about him?” ventured Khadgar, finally. “The Magus, I mean.”
 “Question is,” said Moroes, pulling open yet another door to reveal yet another staircase up. “What do
you know?”

 Khadgar’s own research in the matter was surprisingly unproductive, and his results were frustratingly
sparse. Despite access to the Violet Citadel’s Grand Library (and surreptitious access to a few private
libraries and secret collections), there was precious little on this great and powerful Medivh. This was
doubly odd, since every elder mage in Dalaran seemed to hold Medivh in awe, and wanted one thing or
another from him. Some favor, some boon, some bit of information.
 Medivh was apparently a young man, as wizards went. He was merely in his forties, and for a grand
bulk of that time seemed to have made no impact whatsoever on his surroundings. This was a surprise to
Khadgar. Most of the tales he had heard and read described independent wizards as being extremely
showy, fearless in dabbling in secrets man was not meant to know, and usually dead, crippled, or
damned from messing with powers and energies beyond their ken. Most of the lessons he had learned as
a child about non-Dalaran mages always ended in the same fashion—without restraint, control, and
thought, the wild, untrained, and self-taught wizards always came to a bad end (sometimes, though not
often, destroying a large amount of the surrounding countryside with them).
 The fact that Medivh had failed to bring a castle down on top of himself, or disperse his atoms across
the Twisting Nether, or summon a dragon without knowing how to control that dragon, indicated either
great restraint or great power. From the fuss that the scholars had made about his appointment, and the
list of instructions he had received, Khadgar decided on the latter.
 Yet for all his research, he could not figure out why. Nothing indicated any great research of this
Medivh’s, any major discovery, nor any ground-shaking achievement, that would account for obvious
awe in which the Kirin Tor held this independent mage. No huge wars, great conquests, or known mighty
battles. The bards were noticeably sketchy when it came to the matters involving Medivh, and otherwise
diligent heralds nodded when it came time to discuss his accomplishments.
 And yet, realized Khadgar, there was something important here, something that created in the scholars a
mixture of fear, respect, and envy. The Kirin Tor held no other spellcasters as their equals for magical
knowledge, indeed often sought to hinder those wizards who did not hold allegiance to the Violet Citadel.
And yet they kowtowed to Medivh. Why?
 Khadgar had only the smallest bits—a bit on his parentage (Guzbah was particularly interested in
Medivh’s mother), some margin notes in a grimoire invoking his name, and mention of the occasional visit
to Dalaran. All these visits were within the past five years, and apparently Medivh met only with elder
mages, such as the now-missing Arrexis.
 To sum up, Khadgar knew previous little of this supposedly great mage he was assigned to work for.
And as he considered knowledge to be his armor and sword, he felt woefully underequipped for the
coming encounter.

 Aloud, he said, “Not much.”
 “Eh?” responded Moroes, half-turning on the staircase.
 “I said I don’t know much,” said Khadgar, louder than he meant to. His voice bounced off the bare
walls of the stairway. It was curved now, and Khadgar was wondering if the tower was truly as high as it
seemed. Already his thighs were aching from the climb.
 “Of course you don’t,” said Moroes. “Know, that is. Young people never know much. That’s what
makes them young, I suppose.”
 “I mean,” said Khadgar, irritated. He paused and took a deep breath. “I mean, I don’t know much
about Medivh. You asked.”
 Moroes held for a moment, his foot poised on the next step, “I suppose I did,” he said at last.
 “Whatis he like?” asked Khadgar, his voice almost pleading.
 “Like everyone else, I suppose,” said Moroes. “Has his druthers. Has his moods. Good days and bad.
Like everybody else.”
 “Puts his pants on one leg at a time,” said Khadgar, sighing.
 “No. He levitates into them,” said Moroes. The old servant looked at Khadgar, and the youth caught the
slightest tug of a smile along the old man’s face. “One more set of stairs.”
 The final set of stairs curled tightly, and Khadgar guessed that they had to be near the tower’s highest
spire. The old servant led the way.
 The stairway opened up on a small circular room, surrounded by a wide parapet. As Khadgar had
surmised, they were at the topmost tip of the tower, with a large observatory. The walls and ceilings were
pierced by crystalline windows, clear and unfogged. In the time of their climb, night had fallen fully, and
the sky was dark and strewn with stars.
 The observatory itself was dim, lit by a few torches of the same, unwavering light as found elsewhere.
Yet these were hooded, their lamps banked for observing the night sky. An unlit brazier sat in the middle
of the room in preparation for later, as the temperature would drop toward morning.
 Several large curved tables spread around the outer wall of the observatory, decked with all manner of
devices. Silver levels and golden astrolabes acted as paperweights for foolscap, or as bookmarks
keeping ancient texts open to certain pages. A half-disassembled model, showing planetary movement
through the celestial vault, sat on one table, fine wires and additional beads laid out among the delicate
tools next to it. Notebooks lay stacked against one wall, and others were in crates jammed beneath the
tables. A map of the continent was stretched on a frame, showing the southern lands of Azeroth and
Khadgar’s own Lordaeron, as well as the reclusive dwarven and elven kingdoms of Khaz Modan and
Quel’Thalas. Numerous small pins bedecked the map, constellations that only Medivh could decipher.
 And Medivh was there, for to Khadgar it could be no other. He was a man of middling years, his hair
long and bound in a ponytail in the back. In his youth his hair had likely been ebon black, but now it was
already turning gray at the temples and along the beard. Khadgar knew that this happened to many
mages, from the stress of the magical energies they wielded.
 Medivh was dressed in robes simple for a mage—well cut and fitted to his large frame. A short tabard,
unadorned by decoration, hung to his waist, over trousers tucked into oversize boots. A heavy maroon
cloak hung from his broad shoulders, the hood pulled back.
 As Khadgar’s eyes adjusted to the darkness, he realized that he was wrong about the wizard’s clothing
being unadorned. Instead, it was laced with silver filigree, of such a delicate nature that it was invisible at
first blush. Looking at the mage’s back, Khadgar realized he was looking at the stylized face of some
ancient demon-legend. He blinked, and in that time the tracery transformed itself into a coiled dragon,
and then into a night sky.
 Medivh had his back to the old servant and the young man, ignoring them entirely. He was standing at
one of the tables, a golden astrolabe in one hand, a notebook in the other. He seemed lost in thought, and
Khadgar wondered if this was one of the “things” that Moroes had warned him about.
 Khadgar cleared his throat and took a step forward, but Moroes raised a hand. Khadgar froze in place,
as surely as if transfixed with a magical spell.
 Instead the old servant walked quietly to one side of the master mage, waiting for Medivh to recognize
his presence. A minute passed. A second minute. Then a period that Khadgar swore was an eternity.
 Finally, the robed figure set down his astrolabe, and made three quick jots in the notebook. He closed
the book with sharp snap, and looked over at Moroes.
 Seeing his face for the first time, Khadgar thought that Medivh was much older than his supposed
forty-plus years. The face was deeply lined and worn. Khadgar wondered what magics Medivh wielded
that wrote such a deep history on his face.
 Moroes dipped into his vest and brought out the crumpled letter of introduction, the crimson seal now
bloodred in the steady, unflickering torchlight. Medivh turned and regarded the youth.
 The mage’s eyes were deeply set beneath his dark, heavy brows, but Khadgar was aware at once of the
power within. Something danced and flickered within those deep green eyes, something powerful, and
perhaps uncontrolled. Something dangerous. The master mage glanced at him, and in a moment Khadgar
felt that the wizard had taken in his sum total of existence and found it no more intriguing than that of a
beetle or flea.
 Medivh looked away from Khadgar and at the still-sealed letter of introduction. Khadgar felt himself
relax almost immediately, as if a large and hungry predator had stalked past him without giving him a
second look.
 His relief was short-lived. Medivh did not open the letter. Instead his brows furrowed only slightly, and
the parchment burst into flames with an explosive rush of air. The flames clustered at the far end of the
document from where Medivh held it, and flickered with an intense, blue flame.
 When Medivh spoke his voice was both deep and amused.
 “So,” said Medivh, oblivious to the fact he was holding Khadgar’s future burning in his hand. “It seems
our young spy has arrived at last.”
 Two
 Interview with the Magus
 Is something wrong?” asked Medivh, and Khadgar suddenly felt himself under the master mage’s gaze
again. He felt like a beetle again, but this time one that had inadvertently crawled across a bug-collector’s
work desk. The flames had already consumed half the letter of introduction, and the wax seal was
already melting, dripping onto the observatory’s flagstones.
 Khadgar was aware that his eyes were wide, his face bloodless and pale, and his mouth hanging open.
He tried to force the air out of his body, but all his managed was a strangled, hissing sound.
 The dark, heavy brows pursed in a bemused glance. “Are you ill? Moroes, is this lad ill?”
 “Winded, perhaps,” said Moroes in a level tone. “Was a long climb up.”
 Finally Khadgar managed to gather his senses about him sufficiently to say, “The letter!”
 “Ah,” said Medivh. “Yes. Thank you, I had almost forgotten.” He walked over to the brazier and
dropped the burning parchment on top of the coals. The blue ball of flame rose spectacularly to about
shoulder height, and them diminished into a normal-looking flame, filling the room with a warm, reddish
glow. Of the letter of introduction, with its parchment and crimson seal inscribed with the symbol of the
Kirin Tor, there was no sign.
 “But you didn’t read it!” said Khadgar, then caught himself, “I mean, sir, with respect…”
 The master mage chuckled and settled himself into a large chair made of canvas and dark carved wood.
The brazier lit his face, pulling out the deep lines formed into a smile. Despite this, Khadgar could not
relax.
 Medivh leaned forward in his chair and said, “‘Oh Great and Respected Magus Medivh, Master Mage
of Karazhan, I bring you the greetings of the Kirin Tor, most learned and puissant of the magical
academies, guilds, and societies, advisors to the kings, teachers of the learned, revealers of secrets.’
They continue on in that fashion for some ways, puffing themselves up more with every sentence. How
am I doing so far?”
 “I couldn’t say,” said Khadgar, “I was instructed—”
 “Not to open the letter,” finished Medivh. “But you did, anyway.”
 The master mage raised his eyes to regard the young man, and Khadgar’s breath caught in his throat.
Something flickered in Medivh’s eyes, and Khadgar wondered if the master mage had the power to cast
spells without anyone noticing.
 Khadgar slowly nodded, steeling himself for the response.
 Medivh chuckled loudly, “When?”
 “On the…on the voyage from Lordaeron to Kul Tiras,” said Khadgar, unsure if what he said would
amuse or irritate his potential mentor. “We were becalmed for two days and…”
 “Curiosity got the better of you,” finished Medivh again. He smiled, and it was a clean white smile
beneath the graying beard. “I probably would have opened it the moment I got out of sight of Dalaran’s
Violet Citadel.”
 Khadgar took a deep breath and said, “I considered that, but I believed they had divination spells in
operation, at least at that range.”
 “And you wanted to be far from any spell or message recalling you for opening the letter. And you
patched it back together well enough to fool a cursory examination, sure that I would likely break the seal
straightaway and not notice your tampering.” Medivh allowed himself a chuckle, but drew his face into a
tight, focused knot. “How did I do that?” he asked.
 Khadgar blinked. “Do what, sir?”
 “Know what was in the letter?” said Medivh, the sides of his mouth tugging down. “The letter I just
burned says that I will find the young man Khadgar most impressive in his deduction and intelligence.
Impress me.”
 Khadgar looked at Medivh, and the jovial smile of a few seconds before had evaporated. The smiling
face was now that of some primitive stone god, judgmental and unforgiving. The eyes that had been
tinged with mirth earlier now seemed to be barely concealing some hidden fury. The brows knitted
together like the rising thunderhead of a storm.
 Khadgar stammered for a moment, then said, “You read my mind.”
 “Possible,” said Medivh. “But incorrect. You’re a stew of nerves right now, and that gets in the way of
mind reading. One wrong.”
 “You’ve gotten this sort of letter before,” said Khadgar. “From the Kirin Tor. You know what kind of
letters are written.”
 “Also possible,” said the master mage. “As Ihave received such letters and theydo tend to be
overweening in their self-congratulatory tone. But you know the exact wording as well as I do. A good
try, and the most obvious, but also incorrect. Two wrong.”
 Khadgar’s mouth formed into a tight line. His mind raised and his heart thundered in his chest.
“Sympathy,” he said at last.
 Medivh’s eyes remained unreadable, and his voice level. “Explain.”
 Khadgar took a deep breath. “One of the magical laws. When someone handles an item, they leave a
part of their own magical aura or vibration attached to the item. As auras vary with individuals, it is
possible to connect to one by affecting the other. In this way a lock of hair may be used in a love charm,
or a coin may be tracked back to its original owner.”
 Medivh’s eyes narrowed slightly, and he dragged a finger across his bearded chin. “Continue.”
 Khadgar stopped for a moment, feeling the weight of Medivh’s eyes pressing in on him. That was what
he knew from lectures. He was halfway there. But how did Medivh use it to figure out….
 “The more someone uses an item, the stronger the resonance,” said Khadgar quickly. “So therefore an
item that experiences a lot of handling or attention will have a stronger sympathy.” The words were
coming together tighter and more rapidly now. “So a document which someone had written has more
aura to it than a blank piece of parchment, and the person is concentrating on what they are writing,
so…” Khadgar let his thoughts catch up for a moment. “You were mind reading, but not my mind—the
mind of the scribe who wrote the letter at the time he was writing it—you picked up his thoughts
reinforcing the words.”
 “Without having to physically open the document,” said Medivh, and the light danced within his eyes
again. “So how would this trick be useful to a scholar?”
 Khadgar blinked for a moment, and looked away from the master mage, seeking to avoid his piercing
glance. “You could read books without having to read books.”
 “Very valuable for a researcher,” said Medivh. “You belong to a community of scholars. Why don’t you
do that?”
 “Because…because…” Khadgar thought of old Korrigan, who could find anything in the library, even
the smallest marginal notation. “I think we do, but for older members of the conclave.”
 Medivh nodded. “And that is because…”
 Khadgar thought for a moment, then shook his head.
 “Who would write if all the knowledge could be sucked out with a mental twist and a burst of magic?”
suggested Medivh. He smiled, and Khadgar realized he had been holding his breath. “You’re not bad.
Not bad at all. You know your counterspells?”
 “To the fifth roster,” said Khadgar.
 “Can you power a mystic bolt?” asked Medivh, quickly.
 “One or two, but it’s draining,” answered the younger man, suddenly feeling that the conversation had
taken a serious turn once more.
 “And your primary elementals?”
 “Strongest in flame, but I know them all.”
 “Nature magic?” asked Medivh. “Ripening, culling, harvesting? Can you take a seed and pull the youth
from it until it becomes a flower?”
 “No, sir. I was trained in a city.”
 “Can you make a homunculus?”
 “Doctrine frowns on it, but I understand the principles involved,” said Khadgar, “If you’re curious…”
 Medivh’s eyes lit up for a moment, and he said, “You sailed here from Lordaeron? What type of boat?”
 Khadgar felt thrown for a moment by the sudden change of discussion. “Yes. Um…A Tirassian
wind-runner, theGracious Breeze,” he replied.
 “Out of Kul Tiras,” concluded Medivh. “Human crew?”
 “Yes.”
 “You spoke with the crew at all?” Again, Khadgar felt himself sliding once more from conversation to
interrogation.
 “A little,” said Khadgar. “I think I amused them with my accent.”
 “The crews of the Kul Tiras ships are easily amused,” said Medivh. “Any nonhumans in the crew?”
 “No, sir,” said Khadgar. “The Tirassians told stories of fish men. They called them Murlocs. Are they
real?”
 “They are,” said the Magus. “What other races have you encountered? Other than variations of
humans.”
 “Some gnomes were at Dalaran once,” said Khadgar. “And I’ve met dwarven artificers at the Violet
Citadel. I know dragons from the legends; I saw the dragon’s skull in one of the academies once.”
 “What about trolls, or goblins?” said Medivh.
 “Trolls,” said Khadgar. “Four known varieties of trolls. There may be a fifth.”
 “That would be the bushwah Alonda teaches,” muttered Medivh, but motioned for Khadgar to continue.
 “Trolls are savage, larger than humans. Very tall and wiry, with elongated features. Um…” He thought
for a moment. “Tribal organization. Almost completely removed from civilized lands, almost extinct in
Lordaeron.”
 “Goblins?”
 “Much smaller, more the size of dwarves. Just as inventive, but in a destructive fashion. Fearless. I have
read that as a race they are insane.”
 “Only the smart ones,” said Medivh. “You know about demons?”
 “Of course, sir,” said Khadgar quickly. “I mean from the legends, sir. And I know the proper
abjurations and protections. All mages of Dalaran are taught so from our first day of training.”
 “But you’ve never summoned one,” said Medivh. “Or been present when someone else did so.”
 Khadgar blinked, wondering if this was a trick question. “No sir. I wouldn’t even think of it.”
 “I do not doubt that you wouldn’t,” said the Magus, and there was the faintest edge in his voice. “Think
of it, that is. Do you know what a Guardian is?”
 “A Guardian?” Khadgar suddenly felt the conversation take yet another left-hand turn. “A watchman? A
guard? Perhaps another race? Is it a type of monster? Perhaps a protector against monsters?”
 Medivh smiled, now, and shook his head. “Don’t worry. You’re notsupposed to know. It’s part of the
trick.” Then he looked up and said, “So. What do you know aboutme?”
 Khadgar shot a glance toward Moroes the Castellan, and suddenly realized that the servant has
vanished, fading back into the shadows. The young man stammered for a moment. “The mages of the
Kirin Tor hold you in high regard,” he managed at last, diplomatically.
 “Obviously,” said Medivh brusquely.
 “You are a powerful independent mage, supposedly an advisor to King Llane of Azeroth.”
 “We go back,” said Medivh, nodding at the youth.
 “Beyond that…” Khadgar hesitated, wondering if the mage truly could read his mind.
 “Yes?”
 “Nothing specific to justify the high esteem…” said Khadgar.
 “And fear,” put in Medivh.
 “Andenvy,” finished Khadgar, feeling suddenly put upon by the questions, unsure about how to answer.
He quickly added, “Nothing specific to explain directly the highrespect the Kirin Tor holds you in.”
 “It’s supposed to be that way,” snapped Medivh peevishly, rubbing his hands over the brazier. “It’s
supposed to be that way.” Khadgar could not believe how the master mage could possibly be cold. He
himself felt nervous sweat drip down his back.
 At length, Medivh looked up, and the brewing storm was in his eyes again. “But what do you know
aboutme?”
 “Nothing, sir,” said Khadgar.
 “Nothing?” Medivh’s voice raised and seemed to reverberate across the observatory. “Nothing? You
came all this way for nothing? You didn’t even bother to check? Perhaps I was just an excuse for your
masters to get you out of their hair, hoping you’d die en route. It wouldn’t be the first time someone tried
that.”
 “There wasn’t that much to check. You haven’t done that much,” responded Khadgar hotly, then took a
deep breath, realizing whom he was speaking with, and what he was saying. “I mean, not much that I
could find out, I mean…”
 He expected an outburst from the older mage, but Medivh just chuckled. “And whatdid you find out?”
he asked.
 Khadgar sighed, and said, “You come from a spellcaster heritage. Your father was a mage of Azeroth,
one Nielas Aran. You mother was Aegwynn, which may be a title as opposed to a name, one that goes
back at least eight hundred years. You grew up in Azeroth and know King Llane and Lord Lothar from
your childhood. Beyond that…” Khadgar let his voice trail off. “Nothing.”
 Medivh looked into the brazier and nodded, “Well, thatis something. More than most people can find
out.”
 “And your name means ‘Keeper of Secrets’,” Khadgar added. “In High Elven. I found that out as well.”
 “All too true,” said Medivh, looking suddenly tired. He stared into the brazier for a while. “Aegwynn is
not a title,” he said at length. “It is merely my mother’s name.”
 “Then there were several Aegwynns, probably a family name,” suggested Khadgar.
 “Only one,” said Medivh, somberly.
 Khadgar gave a nervous laugh. “But that would make her…”
 “Over seven hundred fifty years old when I was born,” said Medivh, with a surprising snort. “She is
much older than that. I was a late child in her life. Which may be one reason the Kirin Tor is interested in
what I keep in my library. Which is why they sent you to find out.”
 “Sir,” said Khadgar, as sternly as he could manage. “To be honest, every mage save the highest in the
Kirin Tor wants me to find outsomething from you. I will accommodate them as best as I am able, but if
there is material that you want to keep restricted or hidden, I will fully understand….”
 “If I thought that, you would not have gotten through the forest to reach here,” said Medivh, suddenly
serious. “I need someone to sort and organize the library, for starters, then we work on the alchemical
laboratories. Yes, you’ll do nicely. You see, I know the meaning of your name just as you know mine.
Moroes!”
 “Here, sir,” said the servant, suddenly manifesting out of the shadows. Despite himself, Khadgar jumped.
 “Take the lad down to his quarters and make sure he eats something. It’s been a long day for him.”
 “Of course, sir,” said Moroes.
 “One question, Master,” said Khadgar, catching himself. “I mean, Lord Magus, sir.”
 “Call me Medivh for now. I also answer to Keeper of Secrets and a few other names, not all of them
known.”
 “What do you mean when you say you know my name?” asked Khadgar.
 Medivh smiled, and the rooms suddenly seemed warm and cozy again. “You don’t speak dwarven,” he
observed.
 Khadgar shook his head.
 “My name means ‘Keeper of Secrets’ in High Elven. Your name means ‘Trust’ in the old dwarven
language. So I will hold you to your name, young Khadgar. Young Trust.”

 Moroes saw the young man to his quarters halfway down the tower, explaining in that ghostly, definitive
voice as he shuffled down the stairs. Meals in Medivh’s Tower were simple fare—porridge and sausages
for breakfast, a cold lunch, and a large, hearty dinner, usually a stew or a roast served with vegetables.
Cook would retire after the evening meals, but there were always leftovers in the cold room. Medivh
kept hours that could be charitably described as “erratic” and Moroes and Cook had long since learned
how to accommodate him with a minimal amount of hardship on their parts.
 Moroes informed young Khadgar that, as an assistant instead of a servant, he would not have that
luxury. He would be expected to be available to help the master mage whenever he deemed necessary.
 “I’d expect that, as an apprentice,” said Khadgar.
 Moroes turned in midstep (they were walking along an upper gallery overlooking what seemed to be a
reception hall or ballroom). “Not an apprentice yet, Lad,” wheezed Moroes. “Not by half.”
 “But Medivh said…”
 “You could sort out the library,” said Moroes. “Assistant work, not apprentice’s. Others have been
assistants. None became apprentices.”
 Khadgar’s brow furrowed, and he felt the warmth of a blush on his face. He had not expected there to
be a levelbefore apprentice in the mage’s hierarchy. “How long before…”
 “Couldn’t say, really,” gasped the servant. “None have ever made it that far.”
 Khadgar thought of two questions at once, hesitated, then asked, “How many other ‘assistants’ have
there been?”
 Moroes looked out over the gallery railing, and his eyes grew unfocused. Khadgar wondered if the
servant was thinking or had been derailed by the question. The gallery below was sparsely furnished with
a heavy central table and chairs. It was surprisingly uncluttered, and Khadgar surmised that Medivh did
not hold many banquets.
 “Dozens,” said Moroes at last. “At least. Most of them from Azeroth. An elfling. No, two elflings.
You’re the first from the Kirin Tor.”
 “Dozens,” repeated Khadgar, his heart sinking as he wondered how many times Medivh had welcomed
a young would-be mage into his service.
 He asked the other question. “How long did they last?”
 Moroes snorted this time, and said, “Days. Sometimes hours. One elf didn’t even make it up the tower
stairs.” He tapped the blinders at the side of his wizened head. “Theysee things, you know.”
 Khadgar thought of the figure at the main gate and just nodded.
 At last they arrived at Khadgar’s quarters, in a side passage not far from the banquet hall. “Tidy yourself
up,” said Moroes, handing Khadgar the lantern. “The jakes is at the end of the hall. There’s a pot
beneath the bed. Come down to the kitchen. Cook will have something warm for you.”
 Khadgar’s room was a narrow wedge of the tower, more suitable to the contemplations of a cloistered
monk than a mage. A narrow bed along one wall, and an equally narrow desk along the other with a bare
shelf above. A standing closet for clothes. Khadgar tossed his rucksack into the closet without opening it,
and walked over to the thin window.
 The window was a slim slice of leaded glass, mounted vertically on a pivot in the center. Khadgar
pushed on one half and it slowly pushed open, the solidifying oil in the bottom mount oozing as the
window rotated.
 The view was from still high up the tower’s side, and the rounded hills that surrounded the tower were
gray and bare in the light of the twin moons. From this height it was obvious to Khadgar that the hills had
once been a crater, worn and weathered by the passage of the years. Had some mountain been pulled
from this spot, like a rotted tooth? Or maybe the ring of hills had not risen at all, but rather the rest of the
surrounding mountains had risen faster, leaving only this place of power rooted in its spot.
 Khadgar wondered if Medivh’s mother was here when the land rose, or sank, or was struck by a piece
of the sky. Eight hundred years was long even by the standards of a wizard. After two hundred years,
most of the old object lessons taught, most human mages were deathly thin and frail. To be seven
hundred fifty years old and bear a child! Khadgar shook his head, and wondered if Medivh was having
him on.
 Khadgar shed his traveling cloak and visited the facilities at the hall’s end. They were spartan, but
included a pitcher of cold water and a washbasin and a good, untarnished mirror. Khadgar thought of
using a minor spell to heat the water, then decided merely to tough it out.
 The water was bracing, and Khadgar felt better as he changed into less-dusty togs—a comfortable shirt
that reached nearly to his knees and a set of sturdy pants. His working gear. He pulled a narrow eating
knife from his sack and, after a moment’s thought, slid it into the inside sleeve of one boot.
 He stepped back out into the hallway, and realized that he had no clear idea where the kitchen was.
There had been no cooking shed out by the stables, so whatever arrangements were likely within the
tower. Probably on or near the ground level, with a pump from the well. With a clear path to the banquet
hall, whether or not the hall was commonly used.
 Khadgar found the gallery above the banquet hall easily enough, but had to search to find the staircase,
narrow and twisting in on itself, leading to it. From the banquet hall itself he had a choice of exits.
Khadgar chose the most likely one and ended up in dead-end hallway with empty rooms on all sides,
similar to his own. A second choice brought a similar result.
 The third led the young man into the heart of a battle.
 He did not expect it. One moment he was striding down a set of low flagstone steps, wondering if he
needed a map or a bell or a hunting horn to navigate the tower. The next moment the roof above him
opened up into a brilliant sky the color of fresh blood, and he was surrounded by men in armor, armed
for battle.
 Khadgar stepped back, but the hallway had vanished behind him, only leaving an uneven, barren
landscape unlike any he was familiar with. The men were shouting and pointing, but their voices, despite
the fact that they were right next to Khadgar, were indistinct and muddied, like they were talking to him
from underwater.
 A dream? thought Khadgar. Perhaps he had laid down for a moment and fallen asleep, and all this was
some night terror brought on by his own concerns. But no, he could almost feel the heat of the dying,
corpulent sun on his flesh, and the breeze and shouting men moved around him.
 It was as if he had become unstuck from the rest of the world, occupied his own small island, with only
the most tenuous of connections to the reality around him. As if he had become a ghost.
 Indeed, the soldiers ignored him as if he were a spirit. Khadgar reached out to grab one on the shoulder,
and to his own relief his hand did not pass through the battered shoulder plate. There was resistance, but
only of the most amorphous sort—he could feel the solidity of the armor, and if he concentrated, feel the
rough ridges of the dimpled metal.
 These men had fought, Khadgar realized, both hard and recently. Only one man in three was without
some form of rude bandage, bloodstained badges of war sticking out from beneath dirty armor and
damaged helms. Their weapons were notched as well, and spattered with dried crimson. He had fallen
into a battlefield.
 Khadgar examined their position. They were atop a small hillock, a mere fold in the undulating plains that
seemed to surround them. What vegetation existed had been chopped down and formed into crude
battlements, now guarded by grim-faced men. This was no safe redoubt, no castle or fort. They had
chosen this spot to fight only because there was no other available to them.
 The soldiers parted as their apparent leader, a great, white-bearded man with broad shoulders, pushed
his way through. His armor was a battered as any, but consisted of a breastplate bolted over a crimson
set of scholar’s robes, of the type that would not have been out of place in the halls of the Kirin Tor. The
hem, sleeves, and vest of these crimson robes were inscribed with runes of power—some of which
Khadgar recognized, but others which seemed alien to him. The leader’s snowy beard reached almost to
his waist, obscuring the armor beneath, and he wore a red skullcap with a single golden gem on the
brow. He held a gem-tipped staff in one hand, and a dark red sword in the other.
 The leader was bellowing at the soldiers, in a voice that sounded to Khadgar like the raging sea itself.
The warriors seemed to know what he was saying, though, for they formed themselves up neatly along
the barricades, others filling gaps along the line.
 The snow-bearded commander brushed past Khadgar, and despite himself the youth stumbled back,
out of the way. The commander should not have noticed him, no more than any of the blood-spattered
warriors had.
 Yet the commander did. His voice dropped for a moment, he stammered, his foot landed badly on the
uneven soil of the rocky hilltop and he almost stumbled. Yet instead he turned and regarded Khadgar.
 Yes, he looked at Khadgar, and it was clear to the would-be apprentice that the ancient mage-warrior
saw him and saw him clearly. The commander’s eyes looked deeply into Khadgar’s own, and for a
moment Khadgar felt as he had under Medivh’s own withering glare earlier. Yet, if anything, this was
more intense. Khadgar looked into the eyes of the commander.
 And what he saw there made him gasp. Despite himself, he turned away, breaking the locked gaze with
the mage-warrior.
 When Khadgar looked up again, the commander was nodding at him. It was a brief, almost dismissive
nod, and the old man’s mouth was a tight frown. Then the snow-bearded leader was off again, bellowing
at the warriors, entreating them to defend themselves.
 Khadgar wanted to go after him, to chase him down and find out how he could see him when others did
not, and what he could tell him, but there was a cry around him, a muddy cry of tired men called into duty
one last time. Swords and spears were raised to a sky the shade of curdled blood, and arms pointed
toward the nearby ridges, where flooding had stripped out patterns of purple against the rust-colored
soil.
 Khadgar looked where the men were pointing, and a wave of green and black topped the nearest ridge.
Khadgar thought it was some river, or an arcane and colorful mudflow, but he realized that the wave was
an advancing army. Black was the color of their armor, and green was the color of their flesh.
 They were nightmare creatures, mockeries of human form. Their jade-fleshed faces were dominated by
heavy underslung jaws lined with fanged teeth, their noses flat and snuffling like a dog’s, and their eyes
small, bloody, and filled with hate. Their ebon weapons and ornate armor shone in the eternally dying sun
of this world, and as they topped the rise they let out a bellow that rocked the ground beneath them.
 The soldiers around him let out a cry of their own, and as the green creatures closed the distance
between the hill they let out volley after volley of red-fletched arrows. The front line of the monstrous
creatures stumbled and fell, and were immediately trampled by those who came behind. Another volley
and another rank of the inhuman monsters toppled, yet their failing was subsumed by the advancing tide
of the mass that followed.
 To Khadgar’s right there were flashes as lightning danced along the surface of the earth, and the
monstrosities screamed as the flesh was boiled from their bones. Khadgar thought of the warrior-mage
commander, but also realized that these bolts only thinned the charging hordes by the merest fraction.
 And then the green-fleshed monstrosities were on top of them, the wave of ebon and jade smashing
against the rude palisade. The felled timbers were no more than twigs in the path of this storm, and
Khadgar could feel the line buckle. One of the soldiers nearest him toppled, impaled by a great dark
spear. In the warrior’s place there was a nightmare of green flesh and black armor, howling as it swept
down upon him.
 Despite himself, Khadgar backed two steps, then turned to run.
 And almost slammed into Moroes, who was standing in the archway.
 “You,” wheezed Moroes calmly, “were late. Might have gotten lost.”
 Khadgar wheeled again in place, and saw that behind him was not a world of crimson skies and green
monstrosities, but an abandoned sitting room, its fireplace empty and its chairs covered with drop cloths.
The air smelled of dust only recently disturbed.
 “I was…” gasped Khadgar. “I saw…I was…”
 “Misplaced?” suggested Moroes.
 Khadgar gulped, looked about, then nodded mutely.
 “Late supper is ready,” groaned Moroes. “Don’t get misplaced, again, now.”
 And the dark-clad servant turned and glided quietly out of the room.
 Khadgar took one last look at the dead-end passage he had stumbled into. There were no mystic
archways or magical doorways. The vision (if vision it was) had ended with a suddenness only to be
equaled by its beginning.
 There were no soldiers. No creatures with green flesh. No army about to collapse. There was only a
memory that scared Khadgar to his core. It was real. It had felt real. It had felt true.
 It was not the monsters or the bloodshed that had frightened him. It was the mage-warrior, the
snow-haired commander that seemed to be able to see him. That seemed to have looked into the heart
of him, and found him wanting.
 And worst of all, the white-bearded figure in armor and robes had Khadgar’s eyes. The face was aged,
the hair snow-white, the manner powerful, yet the commander had the same eyes that Khadgar had seen
in the untarnished mirror just moments (lifetimes?) before.
 Khadgar left the sitting room, and wondered if it would not be too late to get a set of blinders.
 Three
 Settling In
 We’ll start you off slow,” said the elder wizard from across the table. “Take stock of the library. Figure
out how you are going to organize it.”
 Khadgar nodded over the porridge and sausages. The bulk of the breakfast conversation was about
Dalaran in general. What was popular in Dalaran and what were the fashions in Lordaeron. What they
were arguing about in the halls of the Kirin Tor. Khadgar mentioned that the current philosophical
question when he left was whether when you created a flame by magic, you called it into being or
summoned it from some parallel existence.
 Medivh huffed over his breakfast. “Fools. They wouldn’t know an alternate dimension if it came up and
bit them on the….So what do you think?”
 “I think…” And Khadgar, suddenly realizing he was once again on the spot. “I think that it may be
something else entirely.”
 “Excellent,” said Medivh, smiling. “When given a choice between two, choose the third. Of course you
meant to say that when you create fire, all you are doing is concentrating the inherent nature of fire
contained in the surrounding area into one location, calling it into being?”
 “Oh yes,” said Khadgar, then adding, “had I thought about it. For a while. Like a few years.”
 “Good,” said Medivh, dabbing at his beard with a napkin. “You’ve a quick mind and an honest
appraisal of yourself. Let’s see how you do with the library. Moroes will show you the way.”
 The library occupied two levels, and was situated about a third of the way up the tower itself. The
staircase along this part of the tower hugged the outside edge of the citadel, leaving a large chamber two
floors high. A wrought iron platform created an upper gallery on the second level. The room’s narrow
windows were covered with interwoven rods of iron, reducing what natural light the room had to little
more than that of a hooded torch. On the great oak tables of the first level, crystalline globes covered
with a thick patina of dust glowed with a blue-gray luster.
 The room itself was a disaster area. Books were scattered opened to random pages, scrolls were
unspooled over chairs, and a thin layer of dusty foolscap covered everything like the leaves on the forest
floor. The more ancient tomes, still chained to the bookshelves, had been unshelved, and hung from their
links like prisoners in some dungeon cell.
 Khadgar surveyed the damage and let out a deep sigh. “Start me off slow,” he said.
 “I could have your gear packed in a hour,” said Moroes from the hallway. The servant would not enter
the library proper.
 Khadgar picked up a piece of parchment at his feet. One side was a demand from the Kirin Tor for the
master mage to respond to their most recent missive. The other side was marked with a dark crimson
smear that Khadgar assumed at first was blood but realized was nothing more than the melted wax seal.
 “No,” said Khadgar, patting his small pouch of scribe tools. “It’s just more of a challenge than I first
anticipated.”
 “Heard that before,” said Moroes.
 Khadgar turned to ask about his comment, but the servant was already gone from the doorway.
 With the care of a burglar, Khadgar picked his way through the debris. It was as if a battle had erupted
in the library. Spines were broken, covers were half-torn, pages were folded over upon themselves,
signatures had been pulled from the bindings entirely. And this was for those books that were still mostly
whole. More portfolios had been pulled from their covers, and the dust on the tables covered a layer of
papers and correspondences. Some of these were open, but some were noticeably still unread, their
knowledge contained beneath their wax seals.
 “The Magus does not need an assistant,” muttered Khadgar, clearing a space at the end of one table and
pulling out a chair. “He needs a housekeeper.” He shot a glance at the doorway to make sure that the
castellan was well and truly gone.
 Khadgar sat down and the chair rocked severely. He stood up again, and saw that the uneven legs had
shifted off a thick tome with a metallic cover. The front cover was ornate, and the page edges clad in
silver.
 Khadgar opened the text, and as he did so he felt something shift within the book, like a slider moving
down a metal rod or a drop of mercury moving through a glass pipe. Something metallic unwound within
the spine of the tome.
 The book began to tick.
 Quickly Khadgar closed the cover, and the book silenced itself with a sharp whirr and a snap, its
mechanism resetting. The young man delicately set the volume back on the table.
 That was when he noticed the scorch marks on the chair he was using, and the floor beneath it.
 “I can see why you go through so many assistants,” said Khadgar, slowly wandering through the room.
 The situation did not improve. Books were hanging open over the arms of chairs and metal railings. The
correspondence grew deeper as he moved farther into the room. Something had made a nest in one
corner of the bookshelf, and as Khadgar pulled it from the shelf, a small shrew’s skull toppled out,
crumbling when it struck the floor. The upper level was little more than storage, books not even reaching
the shelves, just piled in higher stacks, foothills leading to mountains leading to unattainable peaks.
 And there was one bare spot, but this one looked like someone had started a fire in a desperate attempt
to reduce the amount of paper present. Khadgar examined the area and shook his head—something else
burned here as well, for there were bits of fabric, probably from a scholar’s robe.
 Khadgar shook his head and went back to where he had left his scribe’s tools. He spilled out a thin
wooden pen with a handful of metal nibs, a stone for sharpening and shaping the nibs, a knife with a
flexible blade for scraping parchment, a block of octopus ink, a small dish in which to melt the ink, a
collection of thin, flat keys, a magnifying lens, and what looked at first glance like a metallic cricket.
 He picked up the cricket, turned it on its back, and using a specially-fashioned pen nib, wound it up. A
gift from Guzbah upon Khadgar completing his first training as a scribe, it had proved invaluable in the
youth’s perambulations among the halls of the Kirin Tor. Within was contained a simple but effective spell
that warned when a trap was in the offing.
 As soon as he had wound it one revolution, the metallic cricket let out a high-pitched squeal. Khadgar,
surprised, almost dropped the detecting insect. Then he realized that the device was merely warning
about the intensity of the potential danger.
 Khadgar looked at the piled volumes around him, and muttered a low curse. He retreated to the
doorway, and finished winding the cricket. Then he brought the first book he had picked up, the ticking
one, over to the doorway.
 The cricket warbled slightly. Khadgar set the trapped book to one side of the doorway. He picked up
another volume and brought it over. The cricket was silent.
 Khadgar held his breath, hoped that the cricket was enchanted to handle all forms of traps, magical and
otherwise, and opened the book. It was a treatise written in a soft feminine hand on the politics of the
elves from three hundred years back.
 Khadgar set the handwritten volume to the other side of the doorway, and went back for another book.

 “I know you,” said Medivh, the next morning, over sausage and porridge.
 “Khadgar, sir,” said the youth.
 “The new assistant,” said the older mage. “Of course. Forgive, but the memory is not everything it once
was. Too much going on, I’m afraid.”
 “Anything you need aid with, sir?” asked Khadgar.
 The elder man seemed to think about it for a moment, then said, “The library, Young Trust. How are
things in the library?”
 “Good,” said Khadgar. “Very good. I’m busy sorting the books and papers.”
 “Ah, by subject? Author?” asked the master mage.
 Fatal and non-fatal,thought Khadgar. “I’m thinking by subject. Many are anonymous.”
 “Hmmmfph,” said Medivh. “Never trust anything that a man will not set his reputation and name upon.
Carry on, then. Tell me, what is opinion of the Kirin Tor mages about King Llane? Do they ever mention
him?”
 The work proceeded with glacial slowness, but Medivh did not seem to be aware of the time involved.
Indeed, he seemed to start each morning with being mildly and pleasantly surprised that Khadgar was still
with them, and after a short summary of the progress the conversation would switch into a new direction.
 “Speaking of libraries,” he would say. “What is the Kirin Tor’s librarian, Korrigan, up to?”
 “How do people in Lordaeron feel about elves? Have any ever been seen there, in living memory?”
 “Are there any legends of bull-headed men in the halls of the Violet Citadel?”
 And one morning, about week into Khadgar’s stay, Medivh was not present at all.
 “Gone,” said Moroes simply when asked.
 “Gone where?” asked Khadgar.
 The old castellan shrugged, and Khadgar could almost hear the bones clatter within his form. “He’s not
one to say.”
 “What’s he doing?” pressed Khadgar.
 “Not one to say.”
 “When will he be back?”
 “Not one to say.”
 “He would leave me alone in his tower?” asked Khadgar. “Unsupervised, with all his mystic texts?”
 “Could come stand guard over you,” volunteered Moroes. “If that’s what you want.”
 Khadgar shook his head, but said, “Moroes?”
 “Ayep, young sir?”
 “These visions…” started the younger man.
 “Blinders?” suggested the servant.
 Khadgar shook his head again. “Do they show the future or the past?”
 “Both, when I’ve noticed, but I usually don’t,” said Moroes. “Notice, that is.”
 “And the ones of the future, do they come true?” said the young man.
 Moroes let out what Khadgar could only assume was a deep sigh, a bone-rattling exhalation. “In my
experience, yes, young sir. In one vision Cook saw me break a piece of crystal, so she hid them away.
Months passed, and finally the Master asked for that piece of crystal. She removed it from its hiding
place, and within two minutes I had broken it. Completely unintentionally.” He sighed again. “She got her
rose quartz lenses the next day. Will there be anything else?”
 Khadgar said no, but was troubled as he climbed the staircase to the library level. He had gone as far as
he had dared so far in his organization, and Medivh’s sudden disappearance left him high and dry,
without further direction.
 The young would-be apprentice entered the library. On one side of the room were those volumes (and
remains of volumes) that the cricket had determined were “safe,” while the other half of the room was
filled with the (generally more complete) volumes that were noted as being trapped.
 The great tables were covered with loose pages and unopened correspondence, laid out in two
semiregular heaps. The shelves were entirely bare, the chains hanging empty of their prisoners.
 Khadgar could sort through the papers, but better to restock the shelves with the books. But most of the
volumes were untitled, or if titled, their covers so barely worn, scuffed, and torn as to be illegible. The
only way to determine contents would be to open the books.
 Which would set off the trapped ones. Khadgar looked at the scorched mark on the floor and shook his
head.
 Then he started looking, first among the trapped volumes, then among the untrapped ones, until he found
what he was looking for. A book marked with the symbol of the key.
 It was locked, a thick metal band holding it closed, secured by a lock. Nowhere in his searches had
Khadgar come across a real key, though that did not surprise him, given the organization of the room.
The binding was strong, and the cover itself was a metal plate bound in red leather.
 Khadgar pulled the flat pieces of keys from his pouch, but they were all insufficient for the large lock.
Finally, using the tip of his scraping knife, Khadgar managed to thread the sliver of metal through the
lock, and it gave a satisfying “click” as he drove it home.
 Khadgar looked at the cricket he kept on the table, and it was still silent.
 Holding his breath, the young mage opened the heavy volume. The sour smell of decayed paper rose to
his nostrils.
 “Of Trapes and Lockes,” he said aloud, wrapping his mouth around the archaic script and
over-vowelled words. “Beeing a Treateese on the Nature of Securing Devicees.”
 Khadgar pulled up a chair (slightly lower as he had sawed off the three long legs to balance it) and began
to read.

 Medivh was gone a full two weeks, and by that time, Khadgar had claimed the library as his own. Each
morning he rose for breakfast, gave Moroes a perfunctory update as to his progress (which the castellan,
as well as Cook never gave any indication of curiosity about), then buried himself away within the vault.
Lunch and supper were brought to him, and he often worked into the night by the soft bluish light from
the glowing balls.
 He adjusted to the nature of the tower as well. There were often images that hung at the corner of his
eye, just a twinkling of a figure in a tattered cloak that would evaporate when he turned to look at it. A
half-finished word that drifted on the air. A sudden coldness as if a door or window had been left open,
or a sudden change of pressure, as if a hidden entrance had suddenly appeared. Sometimes the tower
groaned in the wind, the ancient stones shifting on each other after centuries of construction.
 Slowly, he learned the nature, if not the exact contents, of the books that were within the library, foiling
the traps that were placed around the most valuable tomes. His research served him well in the last case.
He soon became as expert at foiling spell mechanisms and weighted traps as he had been with locked
doors and hidden secrets in Dalaran. The trick for most of them was to convince the locking mechanism
(whether magical or mechanical in nature) that the lock had not been foiled when in reality it had been.
Determining what set the particular trap off, whether it was weight, or a shifting bit of metal or even
exposure to the sun or fresh air, was half the battle to defeating it.
 There were books that were beyond him, whose locks foiled even his modified picks and dexterous
knife. Those went to the highest level, toward the back, and Khadgar resolved to find out what was
within them, either on his own or by threading the knowledge out of Medivh.
 He doubted the latter, and wondered if the master mage had used the library as anything else than a
dumping ground for inherited texts and old letters. Most mages of the Kirin Tor had at least some
semblance of order to their archives, with their most valuable tomes hidden away. But Medivh had
everything in a hodgepodge, as if he didn’t really need it.
 Except as a test,thought Khadgar. A test to keep would-be apprentices at bay.
 Now the books were on the shelves, the most valuable (and unreadable) ones secured with chains on
the upper level, while the more common military histories, almanacs, and diaries were on the lower floor.
Here were the scrolls as well, ranging from mundane listing of items bought and sold in Stormwind to
recordings of epic poems. The last were particularly interesting since a few of them were about
Aegwynn, Medivh’s claimed mother.
 If she lived over eight hundred years, she must have been a powerful mage indeed,thought Khadgar.
More information about her would likely be in the protected books in the back. So far these tomes had
resisted every common entreaty and physical attempt to sidestep their locks and traps, and the detecting
cricket practically mewled in horror whenever he attempted to unlock them.
 Still, there was more than enough to do, with categorizing the loose pieces, reassembling those volumes
which age had almost destroyed, and sorting (or at least reading) most of the correspondence. Some of
the later was in elven script, and even more of it, from a variety of sources, was in some sort of cipher.
The latter type came with a variety of seals upon it, from both Azeroth, Khaz Modan, and Lordaeron, as
well as places that Khadgar could not locate in the atlas. A large group communicated in cipher with each
other, and with Medivh himself.
 There were several ancient grimoires on codes, most of them dealing with letter replacement and cant.
Nothing compared to the code used in these ciphers. Perhaps they used a combination of methods to
create their own.
 As a result, Khadgar had the grimoires on codes, along with primers in elven and dwarven languages,
open on the table the evening that Medivh suddenly returned to the tower.
 Khadgar didn’t hear him as much as felt his sudden presence, the way the air changes as a storm front
bears across the farmland. The young mage turned in his chair and there was Medivh, his broad
shoulders filling the doorway, his robes billowing behind him of their own volition.
 “Sir, I…” started Khadgar, smiling and half-rising from his chair. Then he saw that the master mage’s
hair was in disarray, and his lambent green eyes were wide and angry.
 “Thief!” shouted Medivh, pointing at Khadgar. “Interloper!” The elder mage pointed at the younger and
began to intone a string of alien syllables, words not crafted for the human throat.
 Despite himself, Khadgar raised a hand and wove a symbol of protection in the air in front of him, but he
might as well have been making a rude hand gesture for all the effect it had on Medivh’s spell. A wall of
solidified air slammed into the younger man, bowling over both him and the chair he sat in. The grimoires
and primers went skating along the surface of the table like boats caught in a sudden squall, and the notes
danced away, spinning.
 Surprised, Khadgar was driven back, slammed into one of the bookshelves behind him. The shelf itself
rocked from the force of the blow, and the youth was afraid it would topple, spoiling his hard work. The
bookcase held its position, though the pressure on Khadgar’s chest from the force of the attack
intensified.
 “Who are you?” thundered Medivh. “What are you doing here?”
 The young mage struggled against the weight on his chest and managed to speak, “Khadgar,” he gasped.
“Assistant. Cleaning library. Your orders.” Part of his mind wondered if this was why Moroes spoke in
such a shorthand fashion.
 Medivh blinked at Khadgar’s words, and straightened like a man who had just been woken from a deep
sleep. He twisted his hand slightly, and at once the wave of solidified air evaporated. Khadgar dropped
to his knees, gasping for air.
 Medivh crossed to him and helped him to his feet. “I am sorry, lad,” he began. “I had forgotten you
were still here. I assumed you were a thief.”
 “A thief that insisted on leaving a room neater than he found it,” said Khadgar. It hurt a little when he
breathed.
 “Yes,” said Medivh, looking around the room, and nodding, despite the disruption his own attack had
caused. “Yes. I don’t believe anyone else had ever gotten this far before.”
 “I’ve sorted by type,” said Khadgar, still bent over and grasping his knees. “Histories, including epic
poems, to your right. Natural sciences on your left. Legendary material in the center, with languages and
reference books. The more powerful material—alchemic notes, spell descriptions, and theory go on the
balcony, along with some books I could not identify that seem fairly powerful. You’re going to have to
look at those yourself.”
 “Yes,” said Medivh, now ignoring the youth and scanning the room. “Excellent. An excellent job. Very
good.” He looked around, seeming like a man just getting his bearings again. “Very good indeed. You’ve
done well. Now come along.”
 The master mage bolted for the door, pulled himself up short, then turned. “Are you coming?”
 Khadgar felt as if he had been hit by another mystic bolt. “Coming? Where are we going?”
 “To the top,” said Medivh curtly. “Come now or we’ll be too late. Time is of the essence!”
 For an older man Medivh moved swiftly up the stairs, covering them two at a time at a brisk pace.
 “What’s at the top?” gasped Khadgar, finally catching up at a landing near the top.
 “Transport,” snapped Medivh, then hesitated for a moment. He turned in place and his shoulders
dropped. For a moment it looked like the fire had burned out of his eyes. “I must apologize. For back
there.”
 “Sir?” said Khadgar, his mind now spinning with this new transformation.
 “My memory is not what it once was, Young Trust,” said the Magus. “I should have remembered you
were in the tower. With everything, I assumed you must have been a…”
 “Sir?” interrupted Khadgar. “Time is of the essence?”
 “Time,” said Medivh, then he nodded, and the intensity returned to his face. “Yes, it is. Come on, don’t
lollygag!” And with that the older man was up on his feet and taking the steps two at a time.
 Khadgar realized that the haunted tower and the disorganized library were not the only reason people
left Medivh’s employ, and hastened after him.
 The aged castellan was waiting for them in the tower observatory.
 “Moroes,” thundered Medivh as he arrived at the top of the tower. “The golden whistle, if you please.”
 “Ayep,” said the servant, producing a thin cylinder. Dwarven runes were carved along the cylinder’s
side, reflecting in the lamplight of the room. “Already took the liberty, sir. They’re here.”
 “They?” started Khadgar. There was the rustle of great wings overhead. Medivh headed for the
ramparts, and Khadgar looked up.
 Great birds descended from the sky, their wings luminescent in the moonlight. No, not birds, Khadgar
realized—gryphons. They had the bodies of great cats, but their heads and front claws were those of sea
eagles, and their wings were golden.
 Medivh held out a bit and bridle. “Hitch yours up, and we’ll go.”
 Khadgar eyed the great beast. The nearest gryphon let out a shrieking cry and pawed the flagstones with
its clawed forelegs.
 “I’ve never…” started the young man. “I don’t know…”
 Medivh frowned. “Don’t they teach anything among the Kirin Tor? I don’t have time for this.” He raised
a finger and muttered a few words, touching Khadgar’s forehead.
 Khadgar stumbled back, shouting in surprise. The elder mage’s touch felt as if he were driving a hot iron
into his brain.
 Medivh said, “Now youdo know. Set the bit and bridle, now.”
 Khadgar touched his forehead, and let out a surprised gasp. Hedid know now, how to properly harness
a gryphon, and to ride one as well, both with saddle and, in the dwarven style, without. He knew how to
bank, how to force a hover, and most of all, how to prepare for a sudden landing.
 Khadgar harnessed his gryphon, aware that his head throbbed slightly, as if the knowledge now within
had to jostle that already within his skull to make room.
 “Ready? Follow!” said Medivh, not asking for a response.
 The pair launched themselves into the air, the great beasts straining and beating the air to allow them to
rise. The great creatures could take armored dwarves aloft, but a human in robes approached their limits.
 Khadgar expertly banked his swooping gryphon and followed Medivh as the elder mage swooped
down over the dark treetops. The pain in his head spread from the point where Medivh had touched him,
and now his forehead felt heavy and his thoughts muzzy. Still, he concentrated and matched the master
mage’s motions exactly, as if he had been flying gryphons all his life.
 The younger mage tried to catch up with Medivh, to ask where they were going, and what their goal
was, but he could not overtake him. Even if he had, Khadgar realized, the rushing wind would drown out
all but the greatest shouts. So he followed as the mountains loomed above them, as they winged
eastward.
 How long they flew Khadgar could not say, He may have dozed fitfully on gryphon-back, but hands
held the reins firm, and the gryphon kept pace with its brother-creature. Only when Medivh suddenly
jinked his gryphon to the right did Khadgar shake himself out of his slumber (if slumber it was) and
followed the master mage as his course turned south. Khadgar’s headache, the likely product of the spell,
had almost completely dissipated, leaving only a ragged ache as a reminder.
 They had cleared the mountain range and Khadgar now realized they were flying over open land.
Beneath them the moonlight was shattered and reflected in myriad pools. A large marsh or swamp,
Khadgar thought. It had to be early in the morning now, the horizon on their right just starting to lighten
with the eventual promise of day.
 Medivh dropped low and raised both hands over his head. Incanting from gryphon-back, Khadgar
realized, and though his mind assured him that he knew how to do this, steering the great beast with his
knees, he felt in his heart that he could never be comfortable in such a maneuver.
 The creatures dropped farther, and Medivh was suddenly bathed in a ball of light, both limning him
clearly and catching Khadgar’s gryphon as a trailing shadow. Beneath them, the young mage saw an
armed encampment on a low rise that jutted from the surrounding swamp. They passed low over the
camp, and beneath him Khadgar could hear shouts and the clatter of armor and weapons being hastily
grabbed. What was Medivh doing?
 They passed over the encampment, and Medivh pulled into a high, banking turn, Khadgar following him
move for move. They returned over the camp, and it was brighter now—the campfires that had
previously been banked were now fed fresh fuel, and blazed in the night. Khadgar saw it was a large
patrol, perhaps even a company. The commander’s tent was large and ornate, and Khadgar recognized
the banner of Azeroth flapping overhead.
 Allies, then, for Medivh was supposedly closely connected to both King Llane of Azeroth and Lothar,
the kingdom’s Knight Champion. Khadgar expected Medivh to land, but instead the mage kicked the
sides of his mount, pulling the gryphon’s head up. The beast’s great wings beat the dark air and they
climbed again, this time rocketing north. Khadgar had no choice but to follow, as Medivh’s light dimmed
and the master mage took the reins again.
 Over the marshlands again, and Khadgar saw a thin ribbon beneath, too straight for a river, too wide for
an irrigation ditch. A road, then, plowed through the swamp, connecting bits of dry land that rose out of
the fen.
 Then the land rose to another ridge, another dry spot, and another encampment. There were also flames
in this encampment, but they were not the bright, contained ones of the army’s forces. These were
scattered throughout the clearing, and as they neared, Khadgar realized they were wagons set alight, their
contents strewn out among the dark human forms that were tossed like children’s dolls on the sandy
ground of the campsite.
 As before, Medivh passed over the campsite, then wheeled high in the air, banking to make a return
pass. Khadgar followed, the young mage himself leaning over the side of his mount to get a better look. It
looked like a caravan that had been looted and set ablaze, but the goods themselves were scattered on
the ground. Wouldn’t bandits take the booty and the wagons? Were there any survivors?
 The answer to the last question came with a shout and a volley of arrows that arched up from the brush
surrounding the site.
 The lead gryphon let out a shriek as Medivh effortlessly pulled back on the reins, banking the creature
clear of the flight of arrows. Khadgar attempted the same maneuver, the warm, false, comforting memory
in his head telling him that this was the correct way to turn. But unlike Medivh, Khadgar was riding too
far forward on his mount, and he had insufficient pull on his reins.
 The gryphon banked, but not enough to avoid all the arrows. A barbed arrow pierced the feathers of the
right wing, and the great beast let out a bleating scream, jerking in flight and desperately attempting to
beat its wings to get above the arrows.
 Khadgar was off-balance, and was unable to compensate. In a heartbeat his hands slipped loose of the
reins, and his knees slipped up from the sides of the gryphon. No longer under tight control, the gryphon
bucked, throwing Khadgar entirely free of its back.
 Khadgar lashed out to grab the reins. The leather lines whipped at his fingertips and then were gone into
the night, along with his mount.
 And Khadgar plummeted toward the armed darkness below.
 Four
 Battle and Aftermath
 The air rushed out of Khadgar’s lungs as he struck the ground. The earth was gritty beneath his fingers,
and he realized he must have landed on a low dune of sandy debris collected along one side of the ridge.
 Uneasily the young mage rose to his feet. From the air the ridge looked like a forest fire. From the
ground it looked like an opening to hell itself.
 The wagons were almost completely consumed by fire now, their contents scattered and blazing along
the ridge. Bolts of cloth had been unwound in the dirt, barrels staved and leaking, and food despoiled
and mashed into the earth. Around him were bodies as well, human forms dressed in light armor. There
was an occasional gleam of a helmet or a sword. Those would be the caravan guards, who failed their
task.
 Khadgar shrugged a painful shoulder, but it felt bruised as opposed to broken. Even given the sand, he
should have landed harder. He shook his head, hard. Whatever ache was left from Medivh’s spell was
outweighed by greater aches elsewhere.
 There was movement among the wreckage, and Khadgar crouched. Voices barked back and forth in an
unfamiliar tongue, a language to Khadgar’s ears both guttural and blasphemous. They were searching for
him. They had seen him topple from his mount and now they were searching for him. As he watched,
stooped figures shambled through the wreckage, forming hunched silhouettes where they passed before
the flames.
 Something tickled the back of Khadgar’s brain, but he could not place it. Instead he started to back out
of the clearing, hoping the darkness would keep him hidden from the creatures.
 Such was not to be. Behind him, a branch snapped or a booted foot found a chuckhole covered by
leaves, or leather armor was tangled briefly in some brush. In any event, Khadgar knew he was not
alone, and he turned at once to see…
 A monstrosity from his vision. A mockery of humanity in green and black.
 It was not as large as the creature of his vision, nor as wide, but it was still a nightmare creature. Its
heavy jaw was dominated by fangs that jutted upward, its other features small and sinister. For the first
time Khadgar realized it had large, upright ears. It probably heard him before it saw him.
 Its armor was dark, but it was leather and not the metal of his dream. The creature bore a torch in one
hand that caught the deep features of its face, making it all the more monstrous. In its other hand the
creature carried a spear decorated with a string of small white objects. With a start Khadgar realized the
objects were human ears, trophies of the massacre around them.
 All this came to Khadgar in an instant, in the moment’s meeting of man and monster. The beast pointed
the grisly-decorated spear at the youth and let out a bellowing challenge.
 The challenge was cut short as the young mage muttered a word of power, raised a hand, and unleashed
a small bolt of power through the creature’s midsection. The beast slumped in on itself, its bellow cut
short.
 One part of his mind was stunned by what he had just done, the other knew that he had seen what these
creatures could do, in the vision in Karazhan.
 The creature had warned the other members of its unit, and now there were war-howls in return around
the encampment. Two, four, a dozen such travesties, all converging on his location. Worse yet, there
were other howls from the swamp itself.
 Khadgar knew he did not have the power to repulse all of them. Summoning the mystic bolt was enough
to weaken him. Another would put him in dire danger of fainting. Perhaps he should try to flee?
 But these monsters probably knew the dark fen that surrounded them better than he did. If he kept to
the sandy ridge, they would find him. If he fled into the swamp, not even Medivh would be able to locate
him.
 Khadgar looked up into the sky, but there was no sign of either the Magus or the gryphons. Had
Medivh landed somewhere, and was sneaking up on the monsters? Or had he returned to the human
force to the south, to bring them here?
 Or, thought Khadgar grimly, had Medivh’s quicksilver mood changed once again and he had forgotten
he had someone with him on this flight?
 Khadgar looked quickly out into the darkness, then back toward the site of the ambush itself. There
were more shadows moving around the fire, and more howling.
 Khadgar picked up the grisly trophy-spear, and strode purposely toward the fire. He might not be able
to fire off more than a mystic bolt or two, but the monsters didn’t know that.
 Perhaps they were as dumb as they looked. And as inexperienced with wizards as he was with them.
 He did surprise them, for what it was worth. The last thing they expected was their prey, the victim they
had unseated from its flying mount, suddenly to manifest at the edge of the campfire’s light, bearing the
trophy-spear of one of their guards.
 Khadgar tossed the spear sideways on the fire, and it sent up a shower of sparks as it landed.
 The young mage summoned a bit of flame, a small ball, and held it in his hand. He hoped that it limned
his features as seriously as the torch had lit the guard’s. It had better.
 “Leave this place,” Khadgar bellowed, praying that his strained voice would not crack. “Leave this place
or die.”
 One of the larger brutes took two steps forward and Khadgar muttered a word of power. The mystic
energies congealed around his flaming hand and blasted the green nonhuman full in the face. The brute
had enough time to raise a clawed hand to its ruined features before it toppled.
 “Flee,” shouted Khadgar, trying to pitch his voice as deeply as he could, “Flee or face the same fate.”
His stomach felt like ice, and he tried not to stare at the burning creature.
 A spear launched out of the darkness, and with the last of his energy Khadgar summoned a bit of air,
just enough to push it clearly aside. As he did he felt faint. That was the last he could do. He was well
and truly tapped out. It would be a good time for his bluff to work.
 The surrounding creatures, about a dozen visible, took a step back, then another. One more shout,
Khadgar reckoned, and they would flee back into the swamp, and give him enough time to flee himself.
He had already decided he would flee south, toward the army encampment.
 Instead there was a high, cackling laugh that froze Khadgar’s blood. The ranks of the green warriors
parted and another figure shambled forward. It was thinner and more hunched than the others, and wore
a robe the color of curdled blood. The color of the sky of Khadgar’s vision. Its features were as green
and misshapened as the others, but this one has a gleam of feral intelligence in its eyes.
 It held out its hand, palm upward, and took a dagger and pierced its palm with the tip. Reddish blood
pooled in the clawed palm.
 The robed beast spoke a word that Khadgar had never heard, a word that hurt the ears, and the blood
burst into flame.
 “Human wants to play?” said the robed monster, roughly matching the human language. “Wants to play
at spells? Nothgrin can play!”
 “Leave now,” tried Khadgar. “Leave now or die!”
 But the young mage’s voice wavered now, and the robed mockery merely laughed. Khadgar scanned
the area around him, looking for the best place to run, wondering if he could grab one of the guard’s
swords laying on ground. He wondered if this Nothgrin was bluffing as much as Khadgar had been.
 Nothgrin took a step toward Khadgar, and two of the brutes to the spellcaster’s right suddenly
screamed and burst into flame. It happened with a suddenness that shocked everyone, including
Khadgar. Nothgrin wheeled toward the immolated creatures, to see two more join them, bursting into
flame like dry sticks. They screamed as well, their knees buckling, and they toppled to the ground.
 In the place where the creatures had been now stood Medivh. He seemed to glow of his own volition,
diminishing the main fire, the burning wagons, and the burning corpses on the ground, sucking their light
into himself. He seemed radiant and relaxed. He smiled at the collected creatures, and it was a savage,
brutal smile.
 “My apprentice told you to leave,” said Medivh, “You should have followed his orders.”
 One of the beasts let out a bellow, and the rogue magus silenced it with a wave of his hand. Something
hard and invisible struck the beast square in the face, and there was a shattering crack as its head came
loose of its body and rolled backward, striking the ground only moments before the creature’s body
struck the sand.
 The rest of the creatures staggered backward a step, then fled entirely into the night. Only the leader, the
robed Nothgrin, held its ground, and its overwide jaw flapped open in surprise.
 “Nothgrin knows you, human,” he hissed. “You are the one….”
 Anything else the creature said disappeared in a scream as Medivh waved a hand and the creature was
pulled off its feet by a burst of air and fire. It was swept upward, screaming, until at last its lungs
collapsed from the stress and remains of its burned body drifted down like black snowflakes.
 Khadgar looked at Medivh, and the wizard had a toothy, self-satisfied smile. The smile faded when he
looked at Khadgar’s ashen face.
 “Are you all right, lad?” he asked.
 “Fine,” said Khadgar, feeling the weight of his exhaustion sweeping over him. He tried to sit but ended
up just collapsing to his knees, his mind worn and empty.
 Medivh was at his side in a moment, passing a palm over the lad’s forehead. Khadgar tried to move the
hand away, but found that he lacked the energy.
 “Rest,” said Medivh. “Recover your strength. The worst is over.”
 Khadgar nodded, blinking. He looked at the bodies around the fire. Medivh could have slain him as
easily, in the library. What stayed his hand, then? Some recognition of Khadgar? Some bit of memory or
of humanity?
 The young mage managed, “Those things.” His voice sounded slurred, “What were…”
 “Orcs,” said the Magus. “Those were orcs. Now no more questions for the moment.”
 To the east, the sky was lightening. To the south, there was the sound of bright horns and powerful
hooves.
 “The cavalry at last,” said Medivh with a sigh. “Too loud and too late, but don’t tell them that. They can
pick up the stragglers. Now rest.”

 The patrol swept through the camp, half of them dismounting, the remainder pressing up along the road.
The horsemen began checking the bodies. A detail was assigned to bury the members of the caravan.
The few dead orcs that Medivh had not set on fire were gathered and put on the main fire, their bodies
charring as their flesh turned to ash.
 Khadgar didn’t remember Medivh leaving him, but he did return with the patrol’s commander. The
commander was a stocky, older man, his face weathered by combat and campaign. His beard was
already more salt than pepper, and his hairline had receded to the back of his head. He was a huge man,
made all the more imposing by his plate armor and greatcape. Over one shoulder Khadgar could see the
hilt of a huge sword, the crosspiece huge and jeweled.
 “Khadgar, this is Lord Anduin Lothar,” said Medivh, “Lothar, this is my apprentice, Khadgar of the
Kirin Tor.”
 Khadgar’s mind spun and caught first on the name. Lord Lothar. The King’s Champion, boyhood
companion of both King Llane and Medivh. The blade on his back had to be the Great Royal Sword,
pledged to defend Azeroth, and…
 Did Medivh just say Khadgar was hisapprentice?
 Lothar dropped to one knee to bring himself level with the young man, and looked at him, smiling. “So
you finally got an apprentice. Had to go to the Violet Citadel to find one, eh, Med?”
 “Find one of suitable merit, yes,” said Medivh.
 “And if it ties the local hedge wizards’ undies in a bundle, so much the better, eh? Oh, don’t look at me
like that, Medivh. What has this one done to impress you?”
 “Oh, the usual,” said Medivh, showing his teeth in a feral grin in response. “Organized my library. Tamed
a gryphon on the first try. Took on these orcs single-handed, including a warlock.”
 Lothar let out a low whistle, “He organizedyour library? Iam impressed.” A smile flashed beneath his
graying moustache.
 “Lord Lothar,” managed Khadgar finally. “Your skill is known even in Dalaran.”
 “You rest, lad,” said Lothar, putting a heavy gauntlet on the young mage’s shoulder. “We’ll get the rest
of those creatures.”
 Khadgar shook his head. “You won’t. Not if you stay on the road.”
 The King’s Champion blinked in surprise, and Khadgar was not sure if it was because of his
presumption or his words.
 “The lad’s right, I’m afraid,” said Medivh. “The orcs have taken to the swamp. They seem to know the
Black Morass better than we do, and that’s what makes them so effective here. We stay on the roads,
and they can run circles around us.”
 Lothar rubbed the back of his head with his gauntlet. “Maybe we could borrow some of those gryphons
of yours to scout.”
 “The dwarves that trained them may have their opinions about loaning out their gryphons,” said Medivh.
“But you might want to talk to them, and to the gnomes as well. They have a few whirligigs and
sky-engines that might be more suitable for scouting.”
 Lothar nodded, and rubbed his chin. “How did you know they were here?”
 “I encountered one of their advance scouts near my domain,” said Medivh, as calmly as if he was
discussing the weather. “I managed to squeeze out of him that there was a large party looking to raid
along the Morass Road. I had hoped to arrive in time to warn them.” He looked at the devastation
around them.
 The sunlight did little to help the appearance of the area. The smaller fires had burned out, and the air
smelled of burning orcflesh. A pallid cloud hung over the site of the ambush.
 A young soldier, little more than Khadgar’s age, ran up to them. They had found a survivor, one that
was pretty badly chewed up, but alive. Could the Magus come at once?
 “Stay with the lad,” said Medivh, “He’s still a little woozy from everything.” And with that the master
mage strode across the scorched and bloody ground, his long robes trailing him like a banner.
 Khadgar tried to rise and follow him, but the King’s Champion put his heavy gauntlet on his shoulder
and held him down. Khadgar struggled only for a moment, then returned to a seated position.
 Lothar regarded Khadgar with a smile. “So the old coot finally took on an assistant.”
 “Apprentice,” said Khadgar weakly, though he felt the pride rising in his chest. The feeling brought a new
strength to his mind and limbs. “He’s had many assistants. They didn’t last. Or so I heard.”
 “Uh-huh,” said Lothar. “I recommended a few of those assistants, and they came back with tales of a
haunted tower and a crazy, demanding mage. What do you think of him?”
 Khadgar blinked for moment. In the past twelve hours, Medivh had attacked him, shoved knowledge
into his head, dragged him across the country on gryphon-back, and let him face off a handful of orcs
before swooping in for the rescue. On the other hand, he had made Khadgar his apprentice. His student.
 Khadgar coughed and said, “He is more than I expected.”
 Lothar smiled again and there was genuine warmth in the smile. “He is more than anyone expected.
That’s one of his good points.” Lothar thought for a moment and said, “That is a very politic and polite
response.”
 Khadgar managed a weak smile. “Lordaeron is a very politic and polite land.”
 “So I’ve noticed in the King’s Council. ‘Dalaran ambassadors can say both yes and no at the same time,
and say nothing as well.’ No insult intended.”
 “None taken, my lord,” said Khadgar.
 Lothar looked at the lad. “How old are you, lad?”
 Khadgar looked at the older man. “Seventeen. Why?”
 Lothar shook his head and grunted, “That might make sense.”
 “Make sense how?”
 “Med, I mean Lord Magus Medivh, was a young man, several years younger than yourself, when he fell
ill. As a result, he never dealt much with someone of your age.”
 “Ill?” said Khadgar. “The Magus was ill?”
 “Seriously,” said Lothar. “He fell into a deep sleep, a coma they called it. Llane and I kept him at
Northshire Abbey, and the holy brothers there fed him broth to keep him from wasting away. For years
he was like that, then, snap, he woke up, right as rain. Or almost.”
 “Almost?” asked Khadgar.
 “Well, he missed a large piece of his teenage years, and a few additional decades as well. He fell asleep
a teenager and woke up a grown man. I always worry that it affected him.”
 Khadgar thought about the master mage’s mercurial temperament, his sudden mood swings, and the
childlike delight with which he approached battling the orcs. Were Medivh a younger man, would his
actions make more sense?
 “His coma,” said Lothar, and shook his head at the memory. “It was unnatural. Med calls it a ‘nap,’ like
it was perfectly reasonable. But we never found out why it happened. The Magus might have puzzled it
out, but he’s shown no interest in the matter, even when I’ve asked.”
 “I am Medivh’s apprentice,” said Khadgar simply. “Why are you telling me this?”
 Lothar sighed deeply and looked out over the battle-scarred ridge. Khadgar realized that the King’s
Champion was a basically honest individual, who would not last a day and a half in Dalaran. His emotions
were plain on his weathered, open face.
 Lothar sucked on his teeth, and said, “To be honest, I worry about him. He’s all alone in his tower….”
 “He has a castellan. And there’s Cook,” put in Khadgar.
 “…with all of his magic,” continued Lothar. “He just seems alone. Tucked up there in the mountains. I
worry about him.”
 Khadgar nodded, and added to himself,and that is why you tried to get apprentices from Azeroth in
there. To spy on your friend. You worry about him, but you worry about his power as well. Aloud,
Khadgar said, “You worry if he’s all right.”
 Lothar gave a shrug, revealing both how much he did worry and how much he was willing to pretend
otherwise.
 “What can I do to help?” asked Khadgar. “Help him. Help you.”
 “Keep an eye on him,” said Lothar. “If you’re an apprentice, he should spend more time with you. I
don’t want him to…”
 “Fall into another coma?” suggested Khadgar.At a time when these orcs are suddenly everywhere. For
his part, Lothar rewarded him with another shrug.
 Khadgar gave the best smile he could manage, “I would be honored to help you both, Lord Lothar.
Know that my loyalty must be to the master mage first, but if there is anything afriend would need to
know, I will pass it along.”
 Another heavy pat of the gauntlet. Khadgar marveled at how badly Lothar concealed his concerns.
Were all the natives of Azeroth this open and guileless? Even now, Khadgar could see there was
something else Lothar wanted to speak of.
 “There’s something else,” said Lothar. Khadgar just nodded politely.
 “Has the Lord Magus spoken of the Guardian to you?” he asked.
 Khadgar thought of pretending to know more than he did, to draw out more from this older, honest man.
But as the thought passed through his head, he discarded it. Best to hold to the truth.
 “I have heard the name from Medivh’s lips,” said Khadgar. “But I know nothing of the details.”
 “Ah,” said Lothar. “Then let it be as if I said nothing to you.”
 “I’m sure we will talk of it in due course,” added Khadgar.
 “Undoubtedly,” said Lothar. “You seem like a trustworthy sort.”
 “After all, I’ve only been his apprentice for a few days,” said Khadgar lazily.
 Lothar’s eyebrows raised, “A few days? Exactly how long have you been Medivh’s apprentice?”
 “Counting until dawn tomorrow?” said Khadgar, and allowed himself a smile. “That would be one.”
 Medivh chose that moment to return, looking more haggard than before. Lothar raised his eyebrows in a
hopeful question, but the Magus merely shook his head. Lothar frowned deeply, and after exchanging a
few pleasantries, left to oversee the rest of salvage and clean-up. The half of the patrol that had moved
ahead along the road had returned, but had found nothing.
 “Are you up for travel?” asked Medivh.
 Khadgar pulled himself to his feet, and the sandy ridge in the middle of the Black Morass seemed like a
ship pitching on a rough sea.
 “Well enough,” he said. “I don’t know if I can handle a gryphon, though, even with…” he let his voice
trail off, but touched his forehead.
 “It’s just as well,” said Medivh. “Your mount got spooked by the arrows, and headed for the high
country. We’ll have to double up.” He raised the rune-carved whistle to his lips and let out a series of
short, sharp blasts. Far above, there was the shriek of a gryphon on the wing, circling high above them.
 Khadgar looked up and said, “So, I’m your apprentice.”
 “Yes,” said Medivh, his face a calm mask.
 “I passed your tests,” said the youth.
 “Yes,” said Medivh.
 “I’m honored, sir,” said Khadgar.
 “I’m glad you are,” said Medivh, and a ghost of a smile crossed his face. “Because now starts the hard
part.”
 Five
 Sands in an Hourglass
 I’ve seen them before,” said Khadgar.
 It was seven days after the battle in the swamp. With their return to the tower (and a day of recovery on
Khadgar’s part), the young mage’s apprenticeship had begun in earnest. The first hour of the day, before
breakfast, Khadgar practiced his spells under Medivh’s tutelage. From breakfast until lunch and through
lunch until supper, Khadgar would assist the master mage with various tasks. These consisted of making
notes as Medivh read off numbers, running down to the library to recover this book or that, or merely
holding a collection of tools as the Magus worked.
 Which was what he was doing at this particular moment, when he finally felt comfortable enough with the
older mage to tell him what he knew about the ambush.
 “Seen who before?” replied his mentor, peering through a great lens at his current experiment. On his
fingers the master mage wore small pointed thimbles ending in infinitely-thin needles. He was tuning
something that looked like a mechanical bumblebee, which flexed its heavy wings as his needles probed
it.
 “The orcs,” said Khadgar. “I’ve seen the orcs we fought before.”
 “You didn’t mention them when you first arrived,” said Medivh absentmindedly, his fingers dancing in
odd precision, lancing the needles into and out of the device. “I remember asking you about other races.
There was no mention. Where have you seen them?”
 “In a vision. Soon after I arrived here,” Khadgar said.
 “Ah. You had a vision. Well, many get them here, you know. Moroes probably told you. He’s a bit of a
blabbermouth, you know.”
 “I’ve had one, maybe two. The one I am sure about was on a battlefield, and these creature, these orcs,
were there. Attacking us. I mean, attacking the humans I was with.”
 “Hmmm,” said Medivh, the tip of his tongue appearing beneath his moustache as he moved the needles
delicately along the bumblebee’s copper thorax.
 “And I wasn’t here,” continued Khadgar. “Not in Azeroth, or Lordaeron. Wherever I was, the sky was
red as blood.”
 Medivh bristled as if struck by an electric shock. The intricate device beneath his tools flashed brightly as
the wrong parts were touched, then screamed, and then died.
 “Red skies?” he said, turning away form the workbench and looking sharply at Khadgar. Energy, intense
and uncaring, seemed to dance along the older man’s dark brows, and the Magus’s eyes were the green
of a storm-tossed sea.
 “Red. Like blood,” said Khadgar. The young man had thought he was becoming used to Medivh’s
sudden and mercurial moods, but this struck him with the force of a blow.
 The older mage let out a hiss. “Tell me about it. The world, the orcs, the skies,” commanded Medivh, his
voice like stone. “Tell meeverything.”
 Khadgar recounted the vision of his first night there, mentioning everything he could remember. Medivh
interrupted constantly—what were the orcs wearing, what was the world like. What was in the sky, on
the horizon. Were there any banners among the orcs. Khadgar felt his thoughts were being dissected and
examined. Medivh pulled the information from Khadgar effortlessly. Khadgar told him everything.
 Everything except the strange, familiar eyes of the warrior-mage commander. He did not feel right
mentioning that, and Medivh’s questions seemed to concentrate more on the red-skied world and the
orcs than the human defenders. As he described the vision, the older mage seemed to calm down, but the
choppy sea still remained beneath his bushy brows. Khadgar saw no need to upset the Magus further.
 “Curious,” said Medivh, slowly and thoughtfully, after Khadgar had finished. The master mage leaned
back in his chair and tapped a needle-tipped finger to his lips. There was a silence that hung over the
room like a shroud. At last he said, “That is a new one. A very new one indeed.”
 “Sir,” began Khadgar.
 “Medivh,” reminded the master mage.
 “Medivh, sir,” began Khadgar again. “Where do these visions come from? Are they hauntings of some
past or portents of the future?”
 “Both,” said Medivh, leaning back in his chair. “And neither. Go fetch an ewer of wine from the kitchen.
My work is done for the day, I’m afraid, its nearly time for supper, and this may take some explaining.”
 When Khadgar returned, Medivh had started a fire in the hearth and was already settling into one of the
larger chairs. He held out a pair of mugs. Khadgar poured, the sweet smell of the red wine mixing with
the cedar smoke.
 “You do drink?” asked Medivh as an afterthought.
 “A bit,” said Khadgar. “It is customary to serve wine with dinner in the Violet Citadel.”
 “Yes,” said Medivh. “You wouldn’t need to if you just got rid of the lead lining for your aqueduct. Now,
you were asking about visions.”
 “Yes, I saw what I described to you, and Moroes…” Khadgar hesitated for a moment, hoping not to
further blacken the castellan’s reputation for gossip, then decided to press on. “Moroes said that I was
not alone. That people saw things like that all the time.”
 “Moroes is right,” said Medivh, taking a long pull from the wine and smacking his lips. “A late harvest
vintage, not bad at all. That this tower is a place of power should not surprise you. Mages gravitate
toward such places. Such places are often where the universe wears thin, allowing it to double back on
itself, or perhaps even allowing entry to the Twisting Nether and to other worlds entirely.”
 “Was that what I saw, then,” interrupted Khadgar, “another world?”
 Medivh held up a hand to hush the younger man. “I am just saying that there are places of power, which
for one reason or another, become the seats of great power. One such location is here, in the Redridge
Mountains. Once long ago something powerful exploded here, carving out the valley and weakening the
reality around it.”
 “And that’s why you sought it out,” prompted Khadgar.
 Medivh shook his head, but instead said, “That’s one theory.”
 “You said there was an explosion long ago that created this place, and it made it a place of magical
power. You then came….”
 “Yes,” said Medivh. “That’s all true, if you look at it in a linear fashion. But what happens if the
explosion occurred because I would eventually come here and the place needed to be ready for me?”
 Khadgar’s face knitted. “But things don’t happen like that.”
 “In the normal world, no, they do not,” said Medivh. “But magic is the art of circumventing the normal.
That’s why the philosophical debates in the halls of the Kirin Tor are so much buffle and blow. They seek
to place rationality upon the world, and regulate its motions. The stars march in order across the sky, the
seasons fall one after the other with lockstepped regularity, and men and women live and die. If that does
not happen, it’s magic, the first warping of the universe, a few floorboards that are bent out of shape,
waiting for industrious hands to pry them up.”
 “But for that to happen to the area to be prepared for you…” started Khadgar.
 “The world would have to be very different than it seems,” answered Medivh, “which it truly is, after all.
How does time work?”
 Khadgar was not thrown as much by Medivh’s apparent change of topic. “Time?”
 “We use it, trust it, measure by it, but whatis it?” Medivh was smiling over the top of his cup.
 “Time is a regular progression of instants. Like sands through an hourglass,” said Khadgar.
 “Excellent analogy,” said Medivh. “One I was going to use myself, and then compare the hourglass with
the mechanical clock. You see the difference between the two?”
 Khadgar shook his head slowly as Medivh sipped on his wine.
 Eventually, the mage spoke, “No, you’re not daft, boy. It’s a hard concept to wrap your brain around.
The clock is a mechanical simulation of time, each beat controlled by a turning of the gears. You can look
at a clock and know that everything advances by one tic of the wheel, one slip of the gears. You know
what is coming next, because the original clockmaker built it that way.”
 “All right,” said Khadgar. “Time is a clock.”
 “Ah, but time is also an hourglass,” said the older Mage, reaching for one planted on the mantel and
flipping it over. Khadgar looked at the timepiece, and tried to remember if it was there before he had
brought up the wine, or even before Medivh reached for it.
 “The hourglass also measures time, true?” said Medivh. “Yet here you never know which particle of
sand will move from the upper half to the lower half at any instant. Were you to number the sands, the
order would be slightly different each time. But the end result is always the same—all the sand has moved
from the top to the bottom. What order it happens in does not matter.” The old man’s eyes brightened
for a moment. “So?” he asked.
 “So,” said Khadgar. “You’re saying that it may not matter if you set up your tower here because an
explosion created this valley and warped the nature of reality around it, or that the explosion occurred
because you would eventually be come here, and the nature of the universe needed to give you the tools
you wanted to stay.”
 “Close enough,” said Medivh.
 “So what these visions are, then, are bits of sand?” said Khadgar. Medivh frowned slightly but the youth
pressed on. “If the tower is an hourglass, and not a clock, then there are bits of sand, of time itself, that
are moving though it at any time. These are unstuck, or overlap each other, so that we can see them, but
not clearly. Some of it is parts of the past. Some of it is parts of the future. Could some of it be of other
worlds as well?”
 Medivh now was thinking deeply himself. “It is possible. Full marks. Well thought out. The big thing to
remember is that these visions are just that. Visions. They waft in and out. Were the tower a clock, they
would move regularly and be easily explained. But since the tower is an hourglass, then they don’t. They
move at their own speed, and defy us to explain their chaotic nature.” Medivh leaned back in his chair.
“Which I, for one, am quite comfortable with. I could never really favor an orderly, well-planned
universe.”
 Khadgar added, “But have you ever sought out a particular vision? Wouldn’t there be a way to discover
a certain future, and then make sure it happened?”
 Medivh’s mood darkened. “Or make sure it never comes to pass,” he said. “No, there are some things
that even a master mage respects and stays clear of. This is one of them.”
 “But…”
 “No buts,” said Medivh, rising and setting his empty mug on the mantelpiece. “Now that you’ve had a
bit of wine—let’s see how that affects your magical control. Levitate my mug.”
 Khadgar furrowed his brow, and realized that his voice had been slightly slurred. “But we’ve been
drinking.”
 “Exactly,” said the master mage. “You will never know what sands the universe will throw in your face.
You can either plan to be eternally vigilant and ready, eschewing life as we know it, or be willing to enjoy
life and pay the price. Now try to levitate the mug.”
 Khadgar didn’t realize until this moment how much he had drunk, and tried to clear the mushiness from
his mind and lift the heavy ceramic mug from the mantel.
 A few moments later, he was heading for the kitchen, looking for a broom and a pan.

 In the evenings, Khadgar’s time was his own, to practice and research, as Medivh dealt with other
matters. Khadgar wondered what the other matters were, but assumed they included correspondence,
for twice a week a dwarf on gryphon-back arrived at the topmost tower with a satchel, and left with a
larger satchel.
 Medivh gave the young man free license in the library to research as he saw fit, including the myriad
questions that his former masters in the Violet Citadel had requested.
 “My only demand,” said Medivh with a smile, “is that you show me what you write before you send it to
them.” Khadgar must have shown his embarrassment, because Medivh added, “Not because I fear you’ll
keep something from me, Young Trust, but because I’d hate for them to know something that I had
forgotten about.”
 So Khadgar plunged into the books. For Guzbah he found an ancient, well-read scroll with an epic
poem, its numbered stanzas precisely detailing a battle between Medivh’s mother Aegwynn and an
unnamed demon. For Lady Delth he made a listing of the moldering elven tomes in the library. And for
Alonda he plunged through those bestiaries he could read, but could not push the number of troll species
past four.
 Khadgar also spent his free time with his lock picks and his personal opening spells. He still sought to
master those books that foiled his earlier attempts to crack them open. These tomes had strong magics
on them, and he could spend an evening among his divinations before getting even the first hint what style
of spell protected its contents.
 Lastly, there was the subject of the Guardian. Medivh had mentioned it, and Lord Lothar had assumed
that the Magus had confided in it to the young man, and backed off quickly when the King’s Champion
had found it not to be the case.
 The Guardian, it seemed, was a phantom, no more or no less real than the time-skewed visions that
seemed to move through the tower. There was a mention in passing of a Guardian (always capitalized) in
this elven tome, a reference in the Azeroth’s royal histories of a Guardian attending this wedding or that
funeral, or being in the vanguard of some attack. Always present, but never identified. Was this Guardian
a position, or, like Medivh’s supposed near-immortal mother, a single being?
 There were other phantoms that orbited this Guardian as well. An order of some sort, an
organization—was the Guardian a holy knight? And the word “Tirisfal” was written in the margins of one
grimoire, and then erased, such that only Khadgar’s skill at examination told him what was once written
there by the carving the pen had done in the parchment. A name of a particular Guardian, or the
organization, or something else entirely?
 It was the evening that Khadgar found this word, four days after the incident with the mug, that the
young man fell into a new vision. Or rather, a vision snuck up on him and surrounded him, swallowing him
whole.
 It was the smell that came to him first, a soft vegetable warmth among the moldering texts, a fragrance
that slowly rose into the room. The heat rose in the room, not uncomfortably, but as a warm damp
blanket. The walls darkened and turned green, and vines trellised up the sides of the bookcases, passing
through and replacing the volumes that were there and spreading wide, flat leaves. Large pale
moonflowers and crimson star orchids sprouted among the stacked scrolls.
 Khadgar took a deep breath, but more from anticipation than fear. This was not the world of harsh land
and orc armies that he had seen before. This was something different. This was a jungle, but it was a
jungle on this world. The thought comforted him.
 And the table disappeared, and the book, and Khadgar was left sitting at a campfire with three other
young men. They seemed to be about his age, and were on some sort of expedition. Sleeping rolls had
been laid out, and the stewpot, empty and already cleaned, was drying by the fire. All three were dressed
for riding, but their clothes were well tailored and of good quality.
 The three men were laughing and joking, though, as before, Khadgar could not make out the exact
words. The blond one in the middle was in the midst of telling a story, and from his hand motions, one
involving a nicely apportioned young woman.
 The one on his right laughed and slapped a knee as the blond one continued his tale. This one ran his
fingers through his hair, and Khadgar noticed that his dark hair was already receding. That was when he
realized he was looking at Lord Lothar. The eyes and nose were his, and the smile just the same, but the
flesh was not yet weathered and his beard was not graying. But it was him.
 Khadgar looked at the third man, and knew at once it had to be Medivh. This one was dressed in a
dark green hunter’s garb, his hood pulled back to reveal a young, mirthful face. His eyes were burnished
jade in the light of the campfire, and he favored the blond one’s story with an embarrassed smile.
 The blond one in the center made a point and motioned to the young Medivh, who shrugged, clearly
embarrassed. The blond one’s story apparently involved the future Magus as well.
 The blond one had to be Llane, now King Llane of Azeroth. Yes, the early stories of the three of them
had found their way even into the Violet Citadel’s archives. The three of them often wandered through
the borders of the kingdom, exploring and putting down all manner of raiders and monsters.
 Llane concluded his story and Lothar nearly fell back over the log he was sitting upon, roaring with
laughter. Medivh suppressed a laugh himself into his curled hand, looking like he was merely clearing his
throat.
 Lothar’s laughter subsided, and Medivh said something, opening his palms upward to make a point.
Lothardid pitch backward now, and Llane himself put his face in his hand, his body heaving in
amusement. Apparently whatever Medivh said topped Llane’s story entirely.
 Then something moved in the surrounding jungle. The three stopped their revelry at once—they must
have heard it. Khadgar, the ghost at this gathering, more felt it instead; something malevolent lurking at
the borders of the campfire.
 Lothar rose slowly and reached for a great, wide-bladed sword laying in its sheath at his feet. Llane
stood up, reaching behind his log to pull out a double-headed ax, and motioned for Lothar to go one
way, Medivh to go the other. Medivh had risen as well by this point, and though his hands were empty
he, even at this age, was the most powerful of the three.
 Llane with his broadax loped forward to one side of the campsite. He might have imagined himself as
stealthy, but Khadgar saw him move with firm-footed deliberation. He wanted whatever was there at the
edge to reveal itself.
 The thing obliged, bursting from its place of concealment. It was half again as tall as any of the young
men, and for one instant he thought it was some gigantic orc.
 Then he recognized it from bestiaries that Alonda had him peruse. It was a troll, one of the jungle breed,
its blue-hued skin pale in the moonlight, its long gray hair lacquered upright into a crest that ran from its
forehead back to the nape of the neck. Like the orcs, it had fangs jutting from its lower jaw, but these
were rounded, peglike tusks, thicker than the sharp teeth of the orcs. Its ears and nose were elongated,
parodies of human flesh. It was dressed in skins, and chains made of human finger bones danced on its
bare chest.
 The troll let out a battle roar, baring its teeth and its chest in rage, and feinted with its spear. Llane swung
at the outthrust weapon, but his blow went wide. Lothar charged from one side, and Medivh came up as
well, eldritch energy dancing off his fingertips.
 The troll sidestepped Lothar’s greatsword, and danced back another step when Llane shredded the air
with his huge ax. Each step covered more than a yard, and the two warriors pressed the troll each time it
retreated. It used the spear more as a shield than a weapon, holding the haft two-handed and knocking
aside the blow.
 Khadgar realized the creature wasn’t fighting to kill the humans, not yet. It was trying to pull them into
position.
 In the vision, the young Medivh must have realized the same thing, because he shouted something to the
others.
 But by this time it was too late, for two other trolls chose that moment to leap from their hiding places on
either side of the combat.
 Llane, for all his planning, was the one caught by surprise, and the spear skewered his right arm. The
broadax’s blade bit into the earth as the future king screamed a curse.
 The other two concentrated on Lothar, and now the warrior was being forced back, using his broad
blade with consummate dexterity, foiling first one thrust, then the other. Still, the jungle trolls showed their
strategy—they were driving the two warriors apart, separating Llane from Lothar, forcing Medivh to
choose.
 Medivh chose Llane. From his phantom viewpoint Khadgar guessed it was because Llane was already
wounded. Medivh charged, his hands flaming….
 And caught the butt end of the troll’s spear in the face, as the troll slammed the heavy haft against
Medivh’s jaw, then turned and with one elegant motion pummeled the wounded Llane. Medivh went
down, and so did Llane, and the ax, spun out of the future sovereign’s hand.
 The troll hesitated a moment, trying to determine who to kill first. It chose Medivh, sprawled on the
ground at its feet, the closer of the two. The troll raised the spear and the obsidian point glowed evil in
the moonlight.
 The young Medivh choked off a series of syllables. A small tornado of dust rose from the ground and
flung itself into the troll’s face, blinding it. The troll hesitated for a moment, and clawed at its dusty orbs
with one hand.
 The hesitation was all Medivh needed, for he lunged forward, not with a spell, but with a simple knife,
plunging it into the back of the troll’s thigh. The troll gave a scream in the night, stabbing blindly. The
spear dug into where Medivh had been, for the young mage had rolled to one side and was now rising,
his fingertips crackling.
 He muttered a word and lightning gathered in a ball between his fingers and lanced forward. The troll
jolted from the shock and hung for a moment, caught in a blue-limned seizure. The creature fell to its
knees, and even then was not done, for it tried to rise, its rheumy red eyes burning with hatred for the
wizard.
 The troll never got its chance, for a shadow rose behind it, and Llane’s recovered ax gleamed briefly in
the moonlight before coming down on the troll’s head, bisecting it at the neck. The creature sprawled
forward, and the two young men, as well as Khadgar, turned to the trolls battling with Lothar.
 The future champion was holding his own, but just barely, and had backed almost across the entire
campsite. The trolls had heard the death scream of their brother, and one continued to press his attack as
the other charged back to deal with the two humans. It let out an inarticulate bellow as it crossed the
campsite, its spear before it like a knight on horseback.
 Llane charged in return, but at the last moment veered to one side, dancing aside the spear’s point. The
troll took two more steps forward, which brought him up to the campfire itself, and where Medivh was
waiting.
 Now the mage seemed to be full of energy and, limned by the coals before him, looked demonic in his
demeanor. He had his arms wide, and he was chanting something harsh and rhythmic.
 And the fire itself leaped up, taking a brief animated form of a giant lion, and leaped on the attacking
troll. The jungle troll screamed as the coals, logs, and ash wrapped itself around him like a cloak, and
would not be shrugged off. The troll flung itself on the ground and rolled first one way and then the other,
trying to dampen the flame, but it did no good. Finally the troll stopped moving entirely, and the hungry
flames consumed it.
 For his part, Llane continued his charge and buried his ax in the side of the surviving troll. The beast let
out a howl, but its moment’s hesitation was all that Lothar needed. The champion batted away the
outthrust spear with a backhanded blow, then with a level, precise swing cut the troll’s head cleanly from
its shoulders. The head bounced into the brush, and was lost.
 Llane, though bleeding from his own wound, slapped Lothar on the back, apparently taunting him for
taking so long with his troll. Then Lothar put a hand to Llane’s chest to quiet him, and pointed at Medivh.
 The young mage was still standing over the fire, his hands held open, but fingers hooked like claws. His
eyes were glassy in the surviving firelight, and his jaw was tightly clenched. As the two men (and the
phantom Khadgar) ran over to him, the young man pitched backward.
 By the time the pair reached Medivh, he was breathing heavily, and his pupils were wide in the
moonlight. Warriors and vision visitor leaned over him, as the young mage strained to push the words out
of his mouth.
 “Watch out for me,” he said, looking at neither Llane nor Lothar, but at Khadgar. Then the young
Medivh’s eyes rolled up in his head and he lay very still.
 Lothar and Llane were trying to revive their friend, but Khadgar just stepped back. Had Medivh truly
seen him, as the other mage, the one with his eyes on the war-swept plains, had? And he had heard him,
clear words spoken almost to the depth of his soul.
 Khadgar turned and the vision dropped away as quickly as a magician’s curtain. He was back in the
library again, and he almost stumbled into Medivh himself.
 “Young Trust,” said Medivh, the version much older than the one laying on the ground in the vanished
vision. “Are you all right? I called out, but you did not answer.”
 “Sorry Med…sir,” said Khadgar, taking a deep breath. “It was a vision. I was lost in it, I’m afraid.”
 Medivh’s dark brows drew together. “Not more orcs and red skies?” he asked seriously, and Khadgar
saw a touch of the storm in those green eyes.
 Khadgar shook his head and chose his words carefully. “Trolls. Blue trolls, and it was a jungle. I think it
was this world. The sky was the same.”
 Medivh’s concern deflated and he just said, “Jungle trolls. I met some once, down south, in the
Strangle-thorn Vale….” The mage’s features softened as he himself seemed to become lost in a vision of
his own. Then he shook his head, “But no orcs this time, right? You are sure.”
 “No, sir,” said Khadgar. He did not want to mention that it was that battle he was witnessing. Was it a
bad memory for Medivh? Was this the time when he slipped into the coma?
 Looking at the older mage, Khadgar could see much of the young man from the vision. He was taller,
but slightly stooped from his years and researches, yet there was the young man wrapped within the older
form.
 Medivh for his part said, “Do you have ‘Song of Aegwynn’?”
 Khadgar shook himself out of his thoughts. “The song?”
 “Of my mother,” said Medivh. “It would be an old scroll. I swear I can’t find anything here since you’ve
cleaned!”
 “It is with the other epic poetry, sir,” said Khadgar.He should tell him about the vision, he thought. Was
this a random event, or was it brought on by his meeting of Lothar? Was finding out about things
triggering visions?
 Medivh crossed to the shelf, and running a finger along the scrolls, pulled the needed version, old, and
well worn. He unwound it partway, checked it against a scrap of paper in his pocket, then rewound and
replaced it.
 “I have to go,” he said suddenly. “Tonight, I’m afraid.”
 “Where are we going?” asked Khadgar.
 “I go alone, this time,” said the elder mage, already striding toward the door. “I will leave instructions for
your studies with Moroes.”
 “When will you return?” shouted Khadgar after his retreating form.
 “When I am back!” bellowed Medivh, taking the stairs up two at a time already. Khadgar imagined the
castellan already at the top of the tower, with his runic whistle and tame gryphon at the ready.
 “Fine,” said Khadgar, looking at the books. “I’ll just sit here and figure out how to tame an hourglass.”
 Six
 Aegwynn and Sargeras
 Medivh was gone a week, all told, and it was a week well spent for Khadgar. He installed himself in the
library, and had Moroes bring his meals there. On more than one occasion he did not even reach his
quarters in the evening, rather spending the time sleeping on the great library tables themselves.
Ultimately, he was searching for visions.
 His own correspondence went unanswered as he plumbed the ancient tomes and grimoires on questions
about time, light, and magic. His early reports had drawn quick responses from the mages of the Violet
Citadel. Guzbah wanted a transcription of the epic poem of Aegwynn. Lady Delth declared that she
recognized none of the titles he sent her—could he send them again, this time with the first paragraph of
each, so she knew what they were? And Alonda was adamant that there had to be a fifth breed of troll,
and that Khadgar had obviously not found the proper bestiaries. The young mage was delighted to leave
their demands unanswered as he sought out a way of taming the visions.
 The key to his incantation, it seemed, would be a simple spell of farseeing, a divination that granted sight
of distant objects and far-off locations. A book of priestly magic had described it as an incantation of
holy vision, yet it worked as well for Khadgar as it did for their clerics. While that priestly spell functioned
over space, perhaps with modification it could function over time. Khadgar reasoned that this would
normally be impossible given the flow of time in a determinant, clockwork universe.
 But it seemed that within the walls of Karazhan, at least, time was an hourglass, and identifying bits of
disjointed time was more likely. And once one hooked into one grain of time, it would be easier to move
that grain to another.
 If others had attempted this within the walls of Medivh’s Tower, there was no clue within the library,
unless it was within the most heavily guarded or unreadable of the tomes located on the iron balcony.
Curiously, the notes in Medivh’s own hand were uninterested in the visions, which seemed to dominate
other notes from other visitors. Did Medivh keep that information in another location, or was he truly
more interested in matters beyond the walls of the citadel than the activities within it?
 Refitting a spell for a new activity was not as simple as changing an incantation here, altering a motion
there. It required a deep and precise understanding of how divination worked, of what it revealed and
how. When a hand-motion changes, or the type of incense used is deleted, the result is most likely
complete failure, where the energies are dissipated harmlessly. Occasionally the energies may go wild and
out of control, but usually the only result of a failed spell is a frustrated spellcaster.
 In his studies, Khadgar discovered that if a spell fails in a spectacular fashion, it indicates that the failed
spell is very close to the final intended spell. The magics are trying to close the gap, to make things
happen, though not always with the results intended by the caster. Of course, sometimes these failed
magic-users did not survive the experience.
 During the process, Khadgar was afraid that Medivh would return at any time, wafting back into the
library, looking for the well-read epic poem or some other bit of trivia. Would he tell his master what he
was trying? And if he did, would Medivh encourage him, or forbid him from trying to find out?
 After five days, Khadgar felt he had the spellmaking complete. The framework remained that of the
farseeing, but it was now empowered with a random factor to allow it to reach through and search out
the discontinuities that seemed to exist within the tower. These bits of misplaced time would be a little
brighter, a little hotter, or simply a little odder than the immediate surroundings, and as such attract the full
force of the spell itself.
 The spell, if it functioned, should in addition tune in the vision better. This would collect the sounds at the
other end and remove the distortion, concentrating them in the same fashion as an elderly person cupping
a hand to the ear to hear better. It would not work for sounds beyond the central location as well, but
should clarify what individuals were saying in addition to what the caster was seeing.
 The evening of the fifth day, Khadgar had completed his calculations, the neat rows and orders of power
and casting laid out in a simple script. Should something go horribly wrong, at least Medivh would figure
out what had happened.
 Medivh, of course, kept a fully equipped pantry of spell components, including a larder of aromatic and
thaumaturgic herbs, and a lapidarium of crushed semi-precious stones. Of these Khadgar chose amethyst
to lay out his magical circle, in the library itself, crisscrossing it with runes of powered rose quartz. He
reviewed the words of power (most of them known to the young mage before he left Dalaran) and
worked through the motions (almost all of them original). Dressed in conjuration robes (more for luck
than effect), he stepped within the casting circle.
 Khadgar let his mind settle and become calm. This was no quickly-cast battle spell, or some offhand
cantrip. Rather this was a deep and powerful spell, one that, if within the Violet Citadel, would set off the
warning abjurations of other mages and bring them flying to him.
 He took a deep breath, and began to cast.
 Within his mind, the spell began to form, a warm, hot ball of energy. He could feel it congeal within him,
as rainbow ripples moved across the surface. This was the core of the spell, usually quickly dispatched to
alter the real world as its caster saw fit.
 Khadgar fitted the sphere with the attributes he desired, to seek out the bits of time that seemed to haunt
the tower, sort through them, and bring together a single vision, one that he could witness spread before
him. The ideas seemed to sink with the imaginary sphere in his mind, and in return the sphere seemed to
hum at a higher pitch, awaiting only release and direction.
 “Bring me a vision,” said the young mage. “Bring me a vision of the young Medivh.”
 With the sound of an egg imploding the magic was gone from his mind, seeping into the real world to
carry out his bidding. There was a rush of air, and as Khadgar looked around, the library began to
transform, as it had before, the vision moving slowly into his space and time.
 Only when it suddenly got colder did Khadgar realize he had called up the wrong vision.
 It moved through the library suddenly, a cold draft as if someone had left a window open. The breeze
went from a draft to a chill to an arctic blast, and despite his own knowledge that it was merely illusion,
Khadgar shivered to his core.
 The walls of the library fell away as the vision took hold with an expanse of white. The chill wind curled
around the books and manuscripts and left a blanket of snow as it passed, thick and hard. Tables,
shelves, and chairs were obscured and then eliminated with the swirls of thick heavy flakes.
 And Khadgar was on a hillside, his feet disappearing at his knees into a bank of snow, but leaving no
mark. He was a ghost within this vision.
 Still, his breath frosted and curled upward as he looked around him. To his right was a copse of trees,
dark evergreens loaded down by the passing snowstorm. Far to his left was a great white cliff. Khadgar
thought it some chalky substance, and then realized that it was ice, as if someone had taken a frozen river
and uprooted it. The ice river was as tall as some of the mountains on Dalaran, and small dark shapes
moved above it. Hawks or eagles, though they would have to be of immense size if they were truly near
the icy cliffs.
 Ahead of him was a vale, and moving up the vale was an army.
 The army melted the snow as it passed, leaving a smudged mark of black behind it like a slug’s trail. The
members of the army were dressed in red, wearing great horned helms and long, high-backed black
cloaks. They were hunters, for they wore all manner of weapons.
 At the head of the army, its leader bore a standard, and atop the standard rode a dripping, decapitated
head. Khadgar thought it some great green-scaled beast, but stopped himself when he realized it was a
dragon’s head.
 He had seen a skull of such a creature in the Violet Citadel, but never thought that he would see one that
had recently been alive. How far back had his vision truly thrown him?
 The army of giant-things were bellowing what could have been a marching song, though it could just as
easily have been a string of curses or a challenging cry. The voices were muddled, as if they were at the
bottom of a great well, but at least Khadgar could hear them.
 As they grew closer, Khadgar realized what they were. Their ornate helmets were not helms, but rather
horns that jutted from their own flesh. Their cloaks were not garments but great batlike wings that jutted
from their backs. Their red-tinged armor was their own thick flesh, glowing from within and melting the
snow.
 They were demons, creatures from Guzbah’s lectures and Korrigan’s hidden pamphlets. Monstrous
beings that exceeded even the orcs in their blood-thirst and sadism. The great, broad-bladed swords
were clearly bathed in crimson, and now Khadgar could see that their bodies were spattered with gore
as well.
 They were here, wherever and whenever here was, and they were hunting dragons.
 There was a soft, distorted sound behind him, no more than a footfall on a soft carpet. Khadgar turned,
and he realized that he was not alone on the hillock overlooking the demon hunting party.
 She had come up from behind him unawares, and if she saw him, she paid him no mind. Just as the
demons seemed a blight incarnate on the land, so, too, did she radiate her own sense of power. This was
a brilliant power that seemed to fold and intensify as she glided along atop the surface of the snow itself.
She was real, but her white leather boots left only the faintest marks in the snow.
 She was tall and powerful and unafraid of the abomination in the valley below. Her garb was as white
and unspoiled as the snow around them, and she wore a vest made of small silver scales. A great white
hooded fur cape with a lining of green silk billowed behind her, held at her throat by a large green stone
which matched her eyes. She wore her blond hair simply, held in place by a silver diadem, and seemed
less affected by the cold than the ghostly Khadgar.
 Yet it was her eyes that held his attention—green as summer forest, green as polished jade, green as the
ocean after a storm. Khadgar recognized those eyes, for he had felt the penetrating gaze of similar eyes,
but from her son.
 This was Aegwynn. Medivh’s mother, the powerful near-immortal mage that was so old as to become a
legend.
 Khadgar also realized where he must be, and this was Aegwynn’s battle against the demon hordes, a
legend saved only in fragments, in the cantos of an epic poem on the library shelf.
 With a pang Khadgar realized where his spell had gone wrong. Medivh had asked for that scroll before
leaving, the last time Khadgar had seen him. Had the spell misfired, passing through a vision of Medivh
himself most recently into the very legend that he was checking?
 Aegwynn frowned as she looked down on the demonic hunting party, the single line dividing her
eyebrows showing her displeasure. Her jade eyes flashed, and Khadgar could guess that a storm of
power was brewing within her.
 It did not take long for that anger to be released. She raised an arm, chanted a short, clipped phrase,
and lightning danced from her fingertips.
 This was no mere conjurer’s bolt, nor even the harshest strike of a summer thunderstorm. This was a
shard of elemental lightning, arcing through the cold air and finding its ground in the surprised demonic
armor. The air split down to its most basic elements as the bolt cleaved through it, and the air smelled
sharp and bitter in its passing, the air thundering in to replace the space the bolt had briefly filled. Despite
himself, despite knowing that he was phantom, despite knowing that this was a vision, despite all this and
the fact that the noise was muted by his ghostly state, Khadgar grimaced and recoiled at the flash and
metallic tolling of the mystic bolt.
 The bolt struck the standard bearer, the one bearing the severed head of the great green dragon. It
immolated the demon where he stood, and those around it were blasted from their feet, falling like hot
coals in the snow. Some did not rise again.
 But the majority of the hunting party were outside the spell’s effect, whether by accident or design. The
demons, each one larger than ten men, recoiled in shock, but that lasted only a moment. The largest of
them bellowed something in a language that sounded like broken metal bells, and half of the demons took
wing, charging Aegwynn’s (and Khadgar’s) position. The other half pulled out heavy bows of black oak
and iron arrows. As they fired the arrows, they ignited, and a rain of fire descended upon them.
 Aegwynn did not flinch, but merely raised a hand in a sweeping motion. The entire sky between her and
the fiery rain erupted in a wall of bluish flame, which swallowed the orange-red bolts as if they had simply
fallen into a river.
 Yet the bolts were merely to provide cover for the attackers, who burst through the blue wall of fire as it
dissipated and dropped on Aegwynn from above. There had to be at least twenty of them, each a giant,
darkening the skies with their huge wings.
 Khadgar looked at Aegwynn and saw that she was smiling. It was a knowing, self-confident smile, and
one that the young mage had seen on Medivh’s face, when they had fought the orcs. She was more than
confident.
 Khadgar looked down the valley to where the archers had been. They had abandoned their useless
missiles but now were gathered together, chanting in a low, buzzing tone. The air warped around them,
and a hole appeared in reality, a dark malignancy against the pristine white. And from that hole dropped
more demons—creatures of every description, with the heads of animals, with flaming eyes, with wings of
bats and insects and great scavenging birds. These demons joined the choir and the rift opened farther,
sucking more and more of the spawn of the Twisting Nether into the cold northern air.
 Aegwynn paid the chanters and reinforcements no mind, but rather coolly concentrated on those
dropping on her from above.
 She passed her hand, palm up. Half of those that flew were turned to glass, and all of them were
knocked from the sky. Those that had been turned to crystal shattered where they struck with discordant
chords. Those that were still living landed with a heavy thump, and rose again, their ichor-splattered
weapons drawn. There were ten left.
 Aegwynn placed her left fist against her upright right palm, and four of the survivors melted, their ruddy
flesh melting off the bones as they slumped into the snow banks. They screamed until their decaying
throats filled with their own desiccated flesh. There were six left.
 Aegwynn clutched at the air and three more demons exploded as their interiors turned into insects and
ripped them from the inside out. They didn’t even have time to scream as their forms were replaced by
swarms of gnats, bees, and wasps, which boiled out toward the forests. There were three left.
 Aegwynn pulled her hands apart and a demon had its arms and legs ripped from its torso by invisible
hands. Two left. Aegwynn raised two fingers and a demon turned to sand, its dying curse lost on the chill
breeze.
 One left. It was the largest, the leader, the bellower of orders. At close range Khadgar could see that its
bare chest was a pattern of scars, and one eye socket was empty. The other burned with hate.
 It did not attack. Neither did Aegwynn. Instead they stopped, frozen for a moment, while the valley
beneath them filled with demons.
 Finally the great behemoth of a demon snarled. His voice was clear but distant to Khadgar’s ears.
 “You are a fool, Guardian of Tirisfal,” it said, wrapping its lips around the uncomfortable human
language.
 Aegwynn let out a laugh, as sharp and as thin as a glass dagger. “Am I, foulspawn? I came here to spoil
your dragon hunt. It seems that I have succeeded.”
 “You are an overconfident fool,” slurred the demon. “While you have been fighting only a few, my
brothers in sorcery have brought in others. A legion of others. Every incubus and petty demon, every
nightmare and shadow-hound, every dark lord and captain of the Burning Legion. All have come here
while you have fought these few.”
 “I know,” said Aegwynn, calmly.
 “Youknow?” bellowed the demon with a throaty laugh. “You know that you are alone in the wilderness,
with every demon raised against you. Youknow?”
 “I know,” said Aegwynn, and there was smile in the voice. “I know you would bring as many of your
allies as possible. A Guardian would be too great a target for you to resist.”
 “You know?”shouted the demon again. “And you came anyway, alone, to this forsaken place?”
 “I know,” said Aegwynn. “But I never said I was alone.”
 Aegwynn snapped her fingers and the sky suddenly darkened, as if a great flock of birds had been
disturbed, and blocked the sun.
 Except they were not birds. They were dragons. More dragons than Khadgar even imagined existing.
They hovered in place on their great wings, waiting for the Guardian’s signal.
 “Foulspawn of the Burning Legion,” said Aegwynn. “It is you that are the fool.”
 The demonic leader let out a cry and raised its blood-spattered sword. Aegwynn was too quick for it,
and raised a hand, three fingers outstretched. The foulspawn’s scar-ridden chest evaporated, leaving only
a cloud of bloody motes. His brawny arms fell away to each side, its abandoned legs folded and it
collapsed, and its head, registering nothing so much as a look of shocked surprise, fell into the melting
snow and was lost.
 That was the signal for the dragons, for as one they turned on the collected horde of summoned demons.
The great flying creatures swooped down from all sides, and flame sprung from their open maws. The
front rows of demons were immolated, reduced to no more than ash in an instant, while others struggled
to pull out their weapons, to ready their own spells, to flee the field.
 In the center of the army, a chant went up, this one an intense pleading, and a passionate cry. These
were the most powerful of the demonic spellcasters, who concentrated their energies as those at the
borders fought off the dragons at deadly cost.
 The demons regrouped and retaliated, and dragons now began to fall from the sky, their bodies riddled
by iron arrows and flaming bolt, by sorcerous poisons and by maddening visions. Still, the circle around
the center of the demons shrank as more and more of the dragons took their revenge against the demons
for the hunt, and the cries in the center became more desperate and indistinct.
 Khadgar looked at Aegwynn, and she was standing stock-still in the snow, her fists clenched, her green
eyes blazing with power, her teeth locked in a hideous grin. She was chanting, too, something dark and
inhuman and beyond even Khadgar’s ability to recognize. She was fighting the spell the demons had
constructed, but she was pulling energy from it as well, bending mystic force contained within back on
itself, like layers of steel in a sword’s blade are folded back on themselves to make the blade stronger
and more potent.
 The cries of the demons in the center reached a fever pitch, and now Aegwynn was shouting herself, a
nimbus of energy coalesced around her. Her hair was loose and flying now, and she raised both arms and
unleashed the last words of her conjuration.
 And there was a flash at the center of the demonic horde, at the center where the casters chanted and
screamed and prayed. It was a rip in the universe, this time a bright rip, as if a doorway into the sun itself
had been opened. The energy spiraled outward, and the demons did not even have time to scream as it
overtook them, burning them out and leaving the shadows of their afterimage as their only testament.
 All of the demons were caught, and a few of the dragons as well who strayed too close to the center of
the demonic horde. They were caught like moths in a flame and snuffed out just as surely.
 Aegwynn let out a ragged breath and smiled. It was the smile of the wolf, of the predator, of the victor.
Where the demonic horde had been there was now a pillar of smoke, rising to the heavens in a great
cloud.
 But as Khadgar watched, the cloud flattened and gathered in on itself, growing darker and more intense,
like the anvil of a thunderhead. Yet in redoubling itself, it grew stronger, and its heart grew blacker,
verging on shades of purple and ebony.
 And from out of the darkened cloud Khadgar saw a god emerge.
 It was a titanic figure, larger than any giant of myth, greater than any dragon. Its skin looked like it was
cast in bronze, and it wore black armor made of molten obsidian. Its great beard and wild hair were
made of living flames, and huge horns jutted from above its dark brow. Its eyes were the color of the
Infinite Abyss. It strode out of the dark cloud, and the earth shook where its feet fell. It carried a huge
spear engraved with runes that dripped burning blood, and it had a long tail ending in a fireball.
 What dragons were left fled the field, heading for the dark forest and the distant cliffs. Khadgar could
not blame them. As much power as Medivh held within him, as much great power that his mother now
showed, it was like two small candles compared to the raw power of this lord of the demons.
 “Sargeras,” hissed Aegwynn.
 “Guardian,” thundered the great demon, in a voice as deep as the ocean itself. In the distance, the ice
cliffs collapsed rather than echo this hellish voice.
 The Guardian pulled herself up to her full height, brushed back a stray blond hair, and said, “I have
broken your toys. You are finished here. Flee while you still have your life.”
 Khadgar looked at the Guardian as if she had lost her mind. Even to his eyes she was exhausted from
her experience, almost as empty as Khadgar had been against the orcs. Surely this titanic demon could
see through the ruse. The epic poem spoke of Aegwynn’s victory. Was he about to witness her death,
instead?
 Sargeras did not laugh, but his voice rolled across the land, pressing down on Khadgar nonetheless.
“The time of Tirisfal is about to end,” said the demon. “This world will soon bow before the onslaught of
the Legion.”
 “Not as long as there is a Guardian,” said Aegwynn. “Not as long as I live, or those who come after
me.” Her fingers curled slightly, and Khadgar could see that she was summoning power within herself,
gathering her wits, her will, and her energy into one great assault. Despite himself, Khadgar took a step
back, then another, then a third. If his elder self could see him in the vision, if young Medivh could see
him, could not these two great powers, mage and monster, see him as well?
 Or was he too small to notice, perhaps?
 “Surrender now,” said Sargeras. “I have use of your power.”
 “No,” said Aegwynn, her hands in tight balls.
 “Then die, Guardian, and let your world die with you,” said the titanic demon, and raised his bleeding
rune-spear.
 Aegwynn raised both hands, and unleashed a shout, half-curse and half-prayer. A flaming rainbow of
colors unseen on this world erupted from her palms, snaking upward like a sentient strike of lightning. It
struck like a dagger thrust in the center of Sargeras’s chest.
 It seemed to Khadgar like a bow-shot fired against a boat, as small and as ineffective. Yet Sargeras
staggered under the blow, taking a half-step backward and dropping his huge spear. It struck the ground
like a meteorite hitting the earth, and the snow rippled beneath Khadgar’s feet. He fell to one knee, but
looked up at the demon lord.
 When Aegwynn’s spell had struck, there was a darkness spreading. No, not a darkness, but rather a
coolness, the heated bronze flesh of the titan-demon dying and being replaced with a cold, inert mass. It
radiated from the center of its chest like a wildfire, leaving consumed flesh behind it.
 Sargeras regarded the growing devastation with surprise, then alarm, then fear. He raised a hand to
touch it, and it spread to that limb as well, leaving an inert mass of rough, black metal behind. Now
Sargeras starting chanting himself, pulling together what energies he possessed to reverse the process, to
staunch the flow, to put out the consuming fire. His words grew hotter and more passionate, and his
unaffected skin flicked with renewed intensity. He was glowing like a sun, shouting curses as the dark
coolness reached where his heart should have been.
 And then there was another flash, this one as intense as the one that consumed the demon horde,
centered on Sargeras himself. Khadgar looked away, looked at Aegwynn, who watched as the fire and
darkness consumed her foe. The brightness of the light dimmed the day itself, and long shadows
stretched out behind the mage.
 And then it was over. Khadgar blinked as his eyes regained their sight. He turned back to the vale and
there was the titanic Sargeras, inert as a thing made of wrought iron, the power burned out of him.
Beneath his weight, the heated arctic ground started to give way, and slowly his dead form fell forward,
remaining whole as it mashed into the ground. The air around them was still.
 Aegwynn laughed. Khadgar looked at her, and she looked drained, both by exhaustion and by madness.
She rubbed her hands and chuckled and started to walk down toward the toppled titan. Khadgar noticed
that she no longer rested delicately atop the drifts, but now had to slog her way down the hill.
 As she left him, the library began to return. The snow began to sublimate in thick clouds of steam, and
the shadowy forms of the shelves, the upper gallery, and the chairs slowly made themselves visible.
 Khadgar turned slightly, back toward where the table should have been, and everything was back to
normal. The library reasserted its reality with a firm suddenness.
 Khadgar let out a chill breath and rubbed his skin. Cool, but not cold. The spell had worked well
enough, in generalities if not particulars. It had called the vision, but not the desired one. The question
was what went wrong, and what was the best way to fix it.
 The young mage reached for his scribe’s pouch, pulling from it a blank sheet of parchment and tools. He
fitted a metal nub to the end of his stylus, melted some of the octopus ink in a bowl, and quickly began to
note everything that happened, how he cast the initial spell, to Aegwynn sinking deeper in the snow as
she walked away.
 He was still working an hour later when there was a cadaverous cough at the doorway. Khadgar was so
wrapped up in thought that he did not notice until Moroes coughed a second time.
 Khadgar looked up, mildly irritated. There was something important he was about to write, but it was
eluding him. Something that was just at the corner of his mind’s eye.
 “The Magus is back,” said Moroes. “Wants you up at the observatory level.”
 Khadgar looked at Moroes blankly for a moment, before the words gained purchase in his mind.
“Medivh’s back?” he managed at last.
 “That’s what I said,” groaned Moroes, each word given grudgingly. “You’re to fly to Stormwind with
him.”
 “Stormwind? Me? Why?” managed the younger mage.
 “You’re the apprentice, that’s why,” scowled Moroes. “Observatory, top level. I’ve summoned the
gryphons.”
 Khadgar looked at his work—line upon line of neat handwriting, delving into every detail. There was
something else that he was thinking about. Instead he said, “Yes. Yes. Let me gather my things up. Finish
this.”
 “Take your time,” said the castellan. “It’s only the Magus that wants you to fly with him to Stormwind
Castle. Nothing important.” And Moroes faded back into the hallway. “Top level,” came his
disembodied voice, almost as an afterthought.
 Stormwind!thought Khadgar,King Llane’s castle . What would be important enough for him to have to
go there? Perhaps a report of the orcs?
 Khadgar looked at his writing. With the news that Medivh was back, and that they would leave soon,
his thoughts were disrupted, and now his mind was on the new task. He looked at the last words he
wrote on the parchment.
 Aegwynn has two shadows,it said.
 Khadgar shook his head. Whatever course his mind was following was gone now. He carefully blotted
the excess ink to make sure it did not smear, and set the pages aside. Then he gathered his tools, and
quickly headed for his quarters. He would have to change into traveling clothes if he was going
gryphon-back, and would need to pack his good conjuring cloak if he was going to meet royalty.
 Seven
 Stormwind
 Up until then, the greatest buildings that Khadgar had ever seen had been the Violet Citadel itself, on
Cross Island outside the city of Dalaran. The majestic spires and great halls of the Kirin Tor, roofed by
thick slate the color of lapis lazuli, which gave the citadel its name, had been a point of pride for Khadgar.
In all his travels through Lordaeron and into Azeroth, nothing, not even Medivh’s Tower, came close to
the ancient grandeur of the citadel of the Kirin Tor.
 Until he came to Stormwind.
 They had flown through the night, as before, and this time the young mage was convinced he had slept
while guiding the gryphon through the chill night air. Whatever knowledge Medivh had placed in his mind
was still operating, for he was sure with his ability to guide the winged predator with his knees, and felt
quite at home. The part of his brain where the knowledge resided felt no pain this time, but rather a slight
thrumming, like the mental tissue had healed over, leaving scar tissue, taking the knowledge within but still
recognizing it as a separate part of him.
 He woke as the sun crested the horizon behind him, and panicked momentarily, causing the great flier to
bank slightly, dragging it away from following in Medivh’s wake. Ahead of him, sudden and brilliant in the
morning sun, was Stormwind.
 It was a citadel of gold and silver. The walls in the morning light seemed to glow with their own radiance,
burnished like a chalice under a castellan’s cleaning. The roofs glittered as if crafted from silver, and for a
moment Khadgar thought they were set with innumerable small gems.
 The young mage blinked and shook his head. The golden walls became mere stone, though polished to a
fine luster in some places, intricately carved in others. The roofs of silver were merely dark slate, and
what he thought were gemstones merely collected dew rainbowing back the dawn.
 And yet Khadgar was still astounded by the city’s size. As great if not greater than anything in
Lordaeron, and seen from this great height, it spread out before him. He counted three full sets of walls
ribboned around the central keep, and lesser barriers separating different wards. Everywhere he looked,
there was more city beneath him.
 Even now, in the dawn hours, there was activity. Smoke rose from morning fires, and already people
were clotting in the open marketplaces and commons. Great wains were lumbered out of the main gates,
loaded with farmers heading for the neat, ordered fields that spread out from the city’s walls like skirts,
stretching almost to the horizon.
 Khadgar could not identify half the buildings. Great towers could have been universities or granaries, as
far as he could tell. A surging river cascade had been harnessed by massive waterwheels, but to what
purpose he could not guess. There was a sudden flame far to his right, though whether from a foundry, a
captive dragon, or some great accident was a mystery.
 It was the greatest city he had ever seen, and at its heart was Llane’s castle.
 It could be no other. Here the walls seemed to be truly made of gold, set with silver around the
windows. The royal roof was shod with blue slate, as deep and luxurious as a sapphire’s, and from its
myriad towers Khadgar could see pennants with the lion’s head of Azeroth, the sigil of King Llane’s
household and symbol of the land.
 The castle complex seemed to be a small city in itself, with innumerable side buildings, towers, and halls.
Arching galleries spanned between buildings, at lengths that Khadgar thought impossible without magical
aide.
 Perhaps such a structure could only be crafted with magic, thought Khadgar, and realized that perhaps
this was one reason Medivh was so valued here.
 The older mage raised a hand and circled over one particular tower, its topmost floor a level parapet.
Medivh pointed down—once, twice, a third time. He wanted Khadgar to land first.
 Pulling from the scabbed-over memories, Khadgar brought the great gryphon down neatly. The great
eagle-headed beast churned its wings backward like a great sail, slowing to a delicate landing.
 There was a delegation already waiting for him. A group of retainers in blue livery surged forward to
take the reins and fit the gryphon’s head with a heavy hood. The alien memories told Khadgar that this
was similar to a falconer’s snood, restricting the raptor’s vision. Another had a bucket of warm cow guts,
which were carefully presented before the gryphon’s snapping beak.
 Khadgar slid from the gryphon’s back and was greeted warmly by Lord Lothar himself. The huge man
seemed even larger in an ornate robe and cape, topped with a inscribed breastplate and filigreed mantle
hanging on his shoulder.
 “Apprentice!” said Lothar, swallowing Khadgar’s hand in his huge meaty paw. “Good to see you’re still
employed!”
 “My lord,” said Khadgar, trying not to wince from the pressure of the larger man’s grip. “We flew
through the night to get here. I don’t…”
 The rest of Khadgar’s statement was swept away in a flurry of wings and the panicked squawk of a
gryphon. Medivh’s mount tumbled out of the sky, and the Magus was less graceful in his landing. The
huge flier slid across the width of the turret and almost fell off the other side, and Medivh pulled hard on
the reins. As it was, the gryphon’s great foreclaws clutched at the crenellated wall, and almost tipped the
older mage over the side.
 Khadgar did not wait for comment from Lord Lothar, but bolted forward, followed by the host of
blue-clad retainers, and Lothar lumbering up behind them.
 Medivh had already dismounted by the time they had reached him, and handed the reigns to the first of
the retainers. “Blasted crosswind!” said the older mage irritably. “I told you this was the precisely wrong
spot for an aviary, but no one listens to the mage around here. Good landing, lad,” he added as an
afterthought, as the servants swarmed over his gryphon, trying to calm it down.
 “Med,” said Lothar, holding out a hand in greeting. “It is good you could come.”
 Medivh just scowled. “I came as soon as I could,” the wizard snapped, responding to some affront that
passed Khadgar by entirely. “You have to get along without me sometimes, you know.”
 If Lothar was surprised by Medivh’s attitude, he said nothing of it. “Good to see you anyway. His
Majesty…”
 “Will have to wait,” finished Medivh. “Take me to the chamber in question, now. No, I know the way
myself. You said it was Huglar and Hugarin. This way, then.” And with that the Magus was off, toward
the side stairs that spiraled into the tower proper. “Five levels down, then a cross bridge, then three levels
up! Horrible place for an aviary!”
 Khadgar looked at Lothar. The larger man rubbed his beefy hand up over his balding pate, and shook
his head. Then he started after the man, Khadgar in tow.
 Medivh was gone by the time they reached the bottom of the spiral, though a litany of complaints and the
occasional curse could be heard up ahead, diminishing fast.
 “He’s in a fine mood,” said Lothar, “Let me walk you to the mage-chambers. We’ll find him there.”
 “He was very agitated last night,” said Khadgar, by way of apology. “He had been gone, and apparently
your summons reached Karazhan shortly after he had returned.”
 “Has he told you what all this is about, Apprentice?” asked Lothar. Khadgar had to shake his head.
 Champion Anduin Lothar frowned deeply. “Two of the great sorcerers of Azeroth are dead, their
bodies burned almost beyond recognition, their heart pulled from their very chests. Dead in their
chambers. And there is evidence—” Lord Lothar hesitated for a moment, as if trying to choose the right
words. “There is evidence of demonic activity. Which is why I sent the fastest messenger to fetch the
Magus. Perhaps he can tell us what happened.”

 “Where are the bodies?” shouted Medivh, as Lothar and Khadgar finally caught up with him. They were
near the top of another of the spires of the castle, the city spread out before them in a great open bay
window opposite the door.
 The room was a shambles, and looked like it had been searched by orcs, and sloppy orcs at that. Every
book had been pulled from the shelves, and every scroll unrolled, and in many cases shredded. Alchemic
devices were smashed, powders and poultices scattered about in a fine dusting, and even the furniture
broken.
 In the center of the room was a ring of power, an inscription carved into the floor itself. The ring was
two concentric circles, incised with words of power between them. The incisions in the floor were deep
and filled with a sticky dark liquid. There were two scorch marks on the floor, each man-sized, situated
between the circle and the window.
 Such incised rings had only one purpose to them, as far as Khadgar knew. The librarian in the Violet
Citadel was always warning about them.
 “Whereare the bodies?” repeated Medivh, and Khadgar was glad that he was not expected to provide
the answers. “Where are the remains of Huglar and Hugarin?”
 “They were removed soon after they were found,” said Lothar calmly. “It was unseemly to leave them
here. We didn’t know when you would arrive.”
 “You didn’t knowif I would arrive, you mean,” snapped Medivh. “All right. All right. We can still salvage
something. Who has come into this room?”
 “The Conjurer-Lords Huglar and Hugarin,” began Lothar.
 “Well, ofcourse,” said Medivh sharply. “They had to be here if they died here. Who else?”
 “One of their servants found them,” continued Lothar. “And I was called. And I brought several
guardsmen to move the bodies. They have not been interred yet, if you wish to examine them.”
 Medivh was already deeply in thought. “Hmmm? The bodies, or the guardsmen? No matter, we can
take care of that later. So that’s a servant, yourself, and about four guards, would you say? And now
myself and my apprentice. No one else?”
 “No one I can think of,” said Lothar.
 The Magus closed his eyes and muttered a few words under his breath. It might have been either a curse
or a spell. His eyes flew open. “Interesting. Young Trust!”
 Khadgar took a deep breath. “Lord Magus.”
 “I need your youth and inexperience. My jaded eyes may see what I’m expecting to see. I need fresh
eyes. Don’t be afraid to ask questions, now. Come here and stand in the center of the room. No, don’t
cross the circle itself. We don’t know if it has any lingering enchantments on it. Stand here. Now. What
do you sense?”
 “I see the wrecked room,” started Khadgar.
 “I didn’t say see,” said Medivh sharply. “I said sense.”
 Khadgar took a deep breath and cast a minor spell, one that sharpened the senses and helped find lost
articles. It was a simple divination, one he had used hundreds of times in the Violet Citadel. It was
particularly good for finding things that others wanted to keep hidden.
 But even upon the first intoned words, Khadgar could feel it was different. There was a sluggishness to
the magic in this room. Often magic had a feel of lightness and energy, but this felt more viscous, almost
liquid in nature. Khadgar had never felt it before, and wondered if it was because of the circles of power,
or powers and cantrips of the late mages themselves.
 It was a thick feeling, like stale air in a room that had been shuttered for years. Khadgar tried to pull the
energies together, but they seemed to resist, to follow his desires with only the greatest reluctance.
 Khadgar’s face grew stern as he tried to pull more of the power of the room, of the magical energies,
into himself. This was a simple spell. If anything, it should be easier in a place where such castings would
be commonplace.
 And suddenly the young mage was inundated with the thick fetid feel of the magic. It was suddenly upon
him and surrounding him, as if he had pulled the bottom-most stone out and brought down a wall upon
himself. The force of the dark, heavy magic fell upon him in a thick blanket, crushing the spell beneath him
and driving him physically to his knees. Despite himself, he cried out.
 Medivh was at his side at once, helping the young mage to his feet. “There, there,” said the Magus, “I
didn’t expect you to succeed even that well. Good try. Excellent work.”
 “What is it?” managed Khadgar, suddenly able to breath again. “It was like nothing I’ve felt before.
Heavy. Resistant. Smothering.”
 “That’s good news for you, then,” said Medivh. “Good that you sensed it. Good that you carried
through. The magic has been particularly twisted here, a remnant of what occurred earlier.”
 “You mean like a haunting?” said Khadgar. “Even in Karazhan, I never…”
 “No, not like that,” said Medivh. “Something much worse. The two dead mages here were summoning
demons. It’s that taint that you feel here, that heaviness of magic. A demon was here. That is what killed
Huglar and Hugarin, the poor, powerful idiots.”

 There was a silence of a moment, then Lothar said, “Demons? In the king’s towers? I cannot believe…”
 “Oh, believe,” said Medivh. “No matter how learned and knowledgeable, how wise and wonderful, how
powerful and puissant, there is always one more sliver of power, one more bit of knowledge, one more
secret to be learned by any mage. I think these two fell into that trap, and called upon forces from
beyond the Great Dark Beyond, and paid the price for it. Idiots. They were friends and colleagues, and
they were idiots.”
 “But how?” said Lothar. “Surely there were to be protections. Wards. This is a mystic circle of power.”
 “Easily breached, easy broken,” said Medivh, leaning over the ring the glimmered with the dried blood
of the two mages. He reached down and produced a thin straw that had laid over the cooling stones.
“A-hah! A simple broom straw. If this was here when they began their summonings, all the adjurations
and phylacteries in the world would not protect them. The demon would consider the circle to be no
more than an arch, a gateway into this world. He would come out, hellfire blazing, and attack the poor
fools who brought him into this world. I’ve seen it before.”
 Khadgar shook his head. The thick darkness that seemed to press in on all sides of him seemed to lift
somewhat, and he gathered his wits about him. He looked around the room. It was already a disaster
area—the demon had torn everything apart in its assault. If there was a broom straw breaking the circle,
then it surely should have been moved elsewhere during the battle.
 “How were the bodies found?” asked Khadgar.
 “What?” said Medivh, with a sharpness that almost made Khadgar jump.
 “I’m sorry,” Khadgar responded quickly. “You said I should ask questions.”
 “Yes, yes, of course,” said Medivh, cooling his harsh tone only a notch. To the King’s Champion he
said, “Well, Anduin Lothar, how were the bodies found?”
 “When I came in, they were on the ground. The servant had not moved them,” said Lothar.
 “Faceup or facedown, sir?” said Khadgar, as calmly as he could. He could feel the icy stare of the elder
mage. “Heads toward the circle or toward the window?”
 Lothar’s face clouded in memory. “Toward the circle. And facedown. Yes, definitely. They were badly
scorched all over, and we had to turn them over to make sure it was Huglar and Hugarin.”
 “What are you driving at, Young Trust?” said the Magus, now seated by the open window, stroking his
beard.
 Khadgar looked at the two scorch marks between the malfunctioned protective circle and the window,
and tried to think of them both as bodies and not think of them as once-living mages. “If you hit someone
from the front, they fall backward. If you hit someone from the back, they fall forward. Was the window
open when you arrived?”
 Lothar looked at the open bay window, the great city beyond forgotten for the moment. “Yes. No. Yes,
I think it was. But it could have been opened by the servant. There was a horrible stench—that’s what
brought attention to it in the first place. I can ask.”
 “No need,” said Medivh. “The window was likely open when your servant entered.” The Magus rose
and walked to where the scorch marks were. “So you think, Young Trust,” he said, “that Huglar and
Hugarin were standing here, watching the magic circle, and something came in the window and hit them
from the back.” For effect he smacked himself against the back of the head with an open palm. “They fell
forward, and were burned in that position.”
 “Yes, sir,” said Khadgar. “I mean, it’s a theory.”
 “A good one,” said Medivh. “But wrong, I’m afraid. In the first place, the two mages would be standing
there, facing nothing at all,unless they were looking at the magic circle. Therefore they were summoning a
demon. Such a circle would not be used otherwise.”
 “But…” started Khadgar, and the Magus froze his words in his throat with a harsh glance.
 “And,”continued Medivh, “while that would work with a single attacker with a sap or a club, it does not
function as well for the dark energies of demons. Had the beast breathed fire, it could have caught both
men standing, killed them, and only after being set alight, the bodies fell forward. You said the bodies
were burned front and back?” He put that question to Lothar.
 “Yes,” said the King’s Champion.
 Medivh held a palm up in front of him. “Demon breathes fire. Burns the front. Huglar (or Hugarin) falls
forward, flames spread to the back. Unless the demon hit Hugarin (or Huglar) in the back, then turned
them over to make sure the front was burned, then turned them over again. Hardly likely—demons are
not that methodical.”
 Khadgar felt his face warm from embarrassment. “I’m sorry. It was just a theory.”
 “And a good one,” said Medivh quickly. “Just in error, that’s all. You’re right, the window would be
open, because that was how the demon left the tower. It is at large in the city right now.”
 Lothar cut short a curse, and said, “Are you sure?”
 Medivh nodded. “Completely. But it will probably be laying low for the moment. Even killing two fools
like Huglar and Hugarin by surprise would tax any but the most powerful creature’s abilities.”
 “I can organize search parties within the hour,” said Lothar.
 “No,” said Medivh. “I want to do this myself. No use throwing away good lives after bad. I’ll want to
see the remains, of course. That will tell me what we’re dealing with here.”
 “We moved them to a cool room in the wine cellar,” said Lothar. “I can take you there.”
 “In a moment,” said Medivh. “I want to look about here for a moment. Will you grant me and my
apprentice a moment or ten alone?”
 Lothar hesitated for a moment, then said, “Of course. I will be right outside.” As he said the last he
looked at Khadgar sharply, then left.
 The door’s latch clicked shut and there was silence in the room. Medivh moved from table to table,
pawing through the shredded tomes and torn papers. He held up a piece of correspondence with a
purple seal, and shook his head. Slowly, he crumbled the piece of paper in his hand.
 “Incivilized countries,” he said, his voice slightly strained, “apprentices don’t disagree with their masters.
At least in public.” He turned toward Khadgar and the youth saw the older man’s face was a mass of
storm clouds.
 “I am sorry,” said Khadgar. “You said I should ask questions, and the position of the bodies did not
seem right at the time, but now that you mention how the bodies were burned…”
 Medivh held up a hand and Khadgar silenced himself. He paused a moment, then let out a slow
exhalation. “Enough. You did the right thing, no more or less than asked by me. And if you hadn’t
spoken up, I wouldn’t have realized the demon probably skittered down the tower itself, and wasted
more time searching the castle complex. But, you asked questions because you don’t know much about
demons, and that is ignorance. And ignorance I willnot tolerate.”
 The elder Magus looked at Khadgar, but there was a smile at the corner of his lips. Khadgar, sure that
the storm had passed, lowered himself onto a stool. Despite himself, he still said, “Lothar…”
 “Will wait,” said Medivh, nodding. “He waits well, that Anduin Lothar. Now, what did you learn of
demons in your time at the Violet Citadel?”
 “I’ve heard the legends,” said Khadgar. “In the First Days, there were demons in the land, and great
heroes arose to drive them out.” He thought of the image of Medivh’s mother blasting the demons to bits,
and facing down their Lord, but said nothing. No need to make Medivh angry again now that he’d
calmed down.
 “That’s the basics,” said Medivh. “What we tell the hoi polloi. What do you know in addition?”
 Khadgar took a deep breath. “The official teachings in the Violet Citadel, in Kirin Tor, is that
demonology is to be eschewed, avoided, and abjured. Any attempt to summon demons are to be found
out and stopped at once, and those involved are to be expelled. Or worse. There were stories, among
the young students, when I was growing up.”
 “Stories grounded in fact,” said Medivh. “But you’re a curious lad, you know more, I assume?”
 Khadgar tilted his head in thought, choosing words carefully. “Korrigan, our academic librarian, had an
extensive collection of…material at his disposal.”
 “And needed someone to help organize it,” said Medivh dryly. Khadgar must have jumped, because
Medivh added, “That was a guess, only, Young Trust.”
 “The material is mostly folk legends and the reports of the local authorities involving demon worshipers.
Most of it was along the lines of individuals committing foul acts in the name of some old demon from the
legends or another. Nothing about the actions of truly summoning a demon. No spells, no arcane
writings.” Khadgar motioned toward the protective circle. “No ceremonies.”
 “Of course,” said Medivh. “Even Korrigan would not inflict that on a student. If he has such things, he
would keep them separate.”
 “From that, the general belief is that when the demons were defeated, they were driven out of this world
entirely. They were pushed out of the world of light and living, and into their own domain.”
 “The Great Dark Beyond,” said Medivh, intoning the phrase like a prayer.
 “They are still out there, or so the legend goes,” said Khadgar, “and they want to come back in. Some
say they come to the weak-willed in their sleep and urge them to find old spells and make sacrifices.
Sometimes it is to open the way for them to come back fully. Others say they want worshipers and
sacrifices to make this world like it once was, bloody and violent, and only then would they return.”
 Medivh was quiet for a moment, stroking his beard, then said, “Anything else?”
 “There’s more. Details and individual stories. I’ve seen carvings of demons, pictures, diagrams.” Again
Khadgar felt a rising need to tell Medivh about the vision, about the demon army. Instead he said, “And
there is that old epic poem, the one about Aegwynn, fighting a horde of demons in a far-off land.”
 The mention of that brought a gentle, knowing smile to Medivh’s face, “Ah yes, “The Song of
Aegwynn.” You’ll find that poem in a lot of powerful mages’ quarters, you know.”
 “My teacher, Lord Guzbah was interested in it,” said Khadgar.
 “Is he, now?” said Medivh, smiling. “With all due respect, I don’t know if Guzbah is quite ready for that
poem. At least not in its true form.” He peaked his eyebrows. “What you have is basically true. A lot of
people couch it in the form of legends and fairy stories, but I think you know as well as I do that demons
are real, and are out there, and yes, form a threat to those of us who walk this sunlit world, as well as
other worlds. I think, now, I definitelythink, that your red-sunned world was another place, a different
world, on the far side of the Great Dark Beyond. The Beyond is a prison for these demons, a place
without light or succor, and they are very, very jealous and very, very anxious to get back in.”
 Khadgar nodded, and Medivh continued, “But your assumption that their victims are weak-willed is in
error, though again an error that is well-intended. There are more than enough venal farmhands who
invoke a demonic force for revenge against a former lover, or stupid merchants who burn an invoice from
a debtor with a black candle, badly mangling the ancient name of some once-great demonic power. But
just as often there are those who walk willingly to the abyss, who feel themselves safe and sure and
knowledgeable that they are beyond any blandishment or threat, that they are powerful enough to harness
the demonic energies that surge beyond the walls of the world. They are in many ways even more
dangerous than the common rabble, for as you know, a near-failure in spellcasting is more deadly than a
complete failure.”
 Khadgar could only nod, and wondered if Medivh had the power of the mind, “But these were powerful
mages—Huglar and Hugarin, I mean.”
 “The most powerful in Azeroth,” said Medivh. “The wisest and finest wizards, magical advisors to King
Llane himself. Safe, sage, and sinecured!”
 “Surely they would know better?” asked Khadgar.
 “You would think so,” said Medivh. “Yet, here we stand in the wreckage of their chambers, and their
demon-burned bodies lay in the wine cellar.”
 “Why would they do it, then?” Khadgar knitted his brows, trying not to offend. “If they knew so much,
why did they try to summon a demon?”
 “Many reasons,” said Medivh with a sigh. “Hubris, that false pride that goes before the fall.
Overconfidence, both in each individually and doubled it for working in tandem. And fear, I suppose,
most of all.”
 “Fear?” Khadgar looked at Medivh quizzically.
 “Fear of the unknown,” said Medivh. “Fear of the known. Fear of things more powerful than they.”
 Khadgar shook his head. “What could be more powerful than two of the most advanced and learned
wizards in Azeroth?”
 “Ah,” said Medivh, and a small smile blossomed beneath his beard. “That would be me. They killed
themselves summoning a demon, playing with forces best left alone, because they fearedme.”
 “You?” said Khadgar, the surprise in his voice greater than he had intended. For a moment he feared
offending the older mage once more.
 But Medivh just took a deep breath and blew the air out slowly. Then he said, “Me. They were fools,
but I blame myself as well. Come, lad, Lothar can wait. It’s time I told you the story of the Guardians
and of the Order of Tirisfal, which is all that stands between us and the Darkness.”
 Eight
 Lessons
 To understand the Order,” said Medivh, “you must understand demons. You must also understand
magic.” He lowered himself comfortably on one of the still-undamaged chairs. The chair also had one of
the few unripped pillows upon it.
 “Lord Medivh…Magus,” said Khadgar. “If there is a demon abroad in Stormwind, we should
concentrate on that, and not on history lessons that could wait until later.”
 Medivh looked down at his chest, and Khadgar feared that he risked another outburst from the elder
mage. But the master mage merely shook his head, and smiled as he said, “Your concerns would be valid
if the demon in question was a threat to those around it. Take my word for it, it is not. The demon, even
were it one of the more powerful officers within the Burning Legion, would have expended almost all its
personal power in dealing with the two powerful mages that summoned it. It is of little matter, at least for
the moment. What is important, is that you understand what the Order is, what I am, and why others are
so deeply interested in it.”
 “But Magus…” started Khadgar.
 “And the sooner I finish the sooner I will know that I can trust you with the information, and the sooner I
will go out to deal with this petty demon, so if you truly want me to go you should let me finish, eh?”
Medivh gave the younger mage a hard, knowing smile.
 Khadgar opened his mouth to protest, but thought better of it. He slouched down against the wide ledge
by the open window. Despite the efforts of the servants to remove the bodies from the tower, the stench
of their death, a corrosive pallor, was still heavy in the air.
 “So. What is magic?” asked Medivh, in the manner of a schoolmage.
 “An ambient field of energy that pervades the world,” said Khadgar, almost without thinking. It was
catechism, a simple answer for a simple question. “It is stronger in some locations than others, but it is
ever-present.”
 “Yes it is,” said the older mage, “at leastnow. But imagine a time when it was not.”
 “Magic is universal,” said Khadgar, knowing as soon as he said it that it was soon to prove not to be.
“Like air or water.”
 “Yes, like water,” said Medivh. “Now imagine a time at the very start of things, when all the water in the
world was in one location. All the rain and rivers and seas and streams, all the showers and creeks and
tears, all in one location, in one well.”
 Khadgar nodded, slowly.
 “Now, instead of water, it is magic we’re talking about,” said Khadgar. “A well of magic, the source, an
opening into other dimensions, a shimmering doorway into the lands beyond the Great Dark, beyond the
walls of the world. The first peoples to cast spells encamped around the well and distilled its raw power
into magic. They were called the Kaldorei then. What they are called now, I cannot say.” Medivh looked
at Khadgar, but the younger mage kept his silence now.
 Medivh resumed. “The Kaldorei grew powerful from their use of magic, but they did not understand its
nature. They did not understand that there were other, powerful forces in the Great Dark Beyond,
moving in the space between worlds, that hungered after magic and were very interested in any who
tamed it and refined it to their own ends. These malign forces were abomination and juggernauts and
nightmares from hundreds of worlds, but we call them simply demons. They sought to invade any world
where magic was mastered and grown, and destroy it, keeping the energies for themselves alone. And
the greatest of them, the master of the Burning Legion, was a demon named Sargeras.”
 Khadgar thought of the vision with Aegwynn and suppressed a shudder.
 If Medivh noticed the young mage’s reaction he did not say anything. “The Lord of the Burning Legion
was both powerful and subtle, and worked to corrupt the early magic-users, the Kaldorei. He
succeeded, for a dark shadow fell upon their hearts, and they enslaved other races, the nascent humans
as well as others, in order to build their empire.”
 Medivh sighed, “Now in this time of the enslaving Kaldorei, there were those with greater vision than
their brethren, who were willing both to speak out against the Kaldorei and to pay the price for their
vision. These brave individuals, both Kaldorei and other races as well, saw the hearts of the ruling
Kaldorei grow cold and dark, and the demonic power grow.”
 “So it came to pass that the Kaldorei were corrupted by Sargeras such that they nearly damned this
world at its birth. The Kaldorei ignored those who spoke out against them, and opened the way for the
most powerful of demons, Sargeras and his lot, to invade. Only by the heroic actions of a few was the
shimmering doorway through the Great Dark shut, exiling Sargeras and his followers. But the victory was
at great cost. The Well of Eternity exploded when the doorway was shut down, and the resulting
explosion ripped the heart out of this world, destroying the Kaldorei lands and the very continent it rested
upon. Those that shut the door were never seen again by living eyes.”
 “Kalimdor!” said Khadgar, interrupting despite himself.
 Medivh looked at him, and Khadgar continued, “Its an old legend in Lordaeron! Once there was an evil
race who meddled foolishly with great power. As punishment for their sins, their lands were broken and
set beneath the waves. It was called the Sundering of the World. Their lands were called Kalimdor.”
 “Kalimdor,” repeated Medivh. “Though you have the child’s version of the tale, the bit we tell would-be
mages to stress the dangers of what they are playing with. The Kaldorei were foolish, and destroyed
themselves and nearly our world. And when the Well of Eternity exploded, the magical energies within
scattered to the four corners of the earth, in an eternal rain of magic. Andthat’s why magic is
universal—it’s the power of the well’s death.”
 “But Magus,” said Khadgar, “that was thousands of years ago.”
 “Ten thousand years,” said Medivh, “give or take a score.”
 “How is it that the legend comes down to us? Dalaran itself has histories only going back twenty
centuries, and the earliest of those are wrapped in legends.”
 Medivh nodded and took up the story again. “Many were lost in the sinking of Kalimdor, but some
survived, and took their knowledge with them. Some of these surviving Kaldorei would found the Order
of Tirisfal. Whether Tirisfal was a person, or a place, or a thing, or a concept, even I cannot say. They
took the knowledge, of what had happened, and swore to keep it from ever happening again, and that is
the bedrock of the Order.
 “Now, the race of humans survived those dark days as well, and thrived, and soon, with magical energy
worked into the fabric of the world itself, they too were scratching at the doors of reality, beginning to
summon creatures from the Great Dark, prying at the shut gates of Sargaras’s prison. That was when
those Kaldorei who had survived and changed themselves came forward with the story of how their
ancestors had almost destroyed the world.
 “The first human mages considered what the surviving Kaldorei had said, and realized that even were
they to lay down their wands and grimoires and ciphers, that others would seek, innocently or less so,
ways to allow the demons access once more to our green lands. And so they continued the Order, now
as a secret society among the most powerful of their mages. This Order of Tirisfal would choose one of
its number, who would serve as theGuardian of theTirisfalen. This guardian would be given the greatest of
powers, and would be the gatekeeper of reality. But now the gate was not a single great well of power,
but rather an infinite rain that continues to fall even today. It is nothing less than the heaviest responsibility
in the world.”
 Medivh fell silent, and his eyes lost their focus briefly, as if he were suddenly swept into the past himself.
Then he shook his head, returning to himself, but still did not speak.
 “You are the Guardian,” said Khadgar, simply.
 “Aye,” said Medivh, “I am the child of the greatest Guardian of all time, and was given her power soon
after my birth. It was…too much for me, and I paid for it with a good piece of my youth.”
 “But you said the mages chose among themselves,” said Khadgar. “Couldn’t Magna Aegwynn have
chosen an older candidate? Why chose a child, especially her own child?”
 Medivh took a deep breath. “The first Guardians, for the first millennium, were chosen among the select
group. The very existence of the Order was kept hidden, as was the wishes of the original founders.
However, over time, politics and personal interests came into play, such that the Guardian soon became
little more than a servant, a magical dogsbody. Some of the more powerful mages felt it was the
Guardian’s job to keepeveryone else from enjoying the power that they themselves commanded. Like
the Kaldorei before us, a shadow of corrupting power was moving through the members of the Order.
More demons were getting through, and even Sargeras himself had manifested the smallest bits of
himself. A mere fraction of his power, but enough to slay armies and destroy nations.”
 Khadgar thought of the image of Sargeras that fought Aegwynn in the vision. Could this have been a
mere fraction of the great demon’s power?
 “Magna Aegwynn,” Medivh said the words, then stopped. It was as if he was not used to speaking
those words. “She who bore me was herself born nearly a thousand years ago. She was greatly gifted,
and chosen by other members of the Order to become the Guardian. I believe the grayest of the
graybeards of that time thought they could control her, and in doing so continue to use the Guardian as a
pawn of their own political games.
 “She surprised them.”—and at this Medivh smiled. “She refused to be manipulated, and indeed fought
against some of the greatest mages of her age when they themselves fell into demonic lore. Some thought
that her independence was a passing thing, that when her time came, she would have to pass the mantle
on to a more malleable candidate. Again, she surprised them, using the magics within her to live for a
thousand years, unchanging, and to wield her power with wisdom and grace. So the Order and the
Guardian split. The former can advise the latter, but the latter must be free to challenge the former, to
avoid what happened to the Kaldorei.
 “For a thousand years she fought the Great Dark, even challenging the physical aspect of Sargeras
himself, who had instilled himself into this plane and sought to destroy the mythical dragons, adding their
power to his own. Magna Aegwynn met him and defeated him, locking his body away in a place where
none knows, keeping him forever from the Great Dark that is his power. That’s in that epic poem, ‘The
Song of Aegwynn,’ the one Guzbah wants. But she could not do it forever, and there must always be a
Guardian.
 “And then…” And again Medivh’s voice faltered. “She had one more trick up her sleeve. Powerful she
was, but she was still of mortal flesh. She was expected to pass on her power. Instead she fathered an
heir on a conjurer from the Court of Azeroth itself, and she chose that child as her successor. She
threatened the Order, saying that if her choice was not honored, she would not step down, and would
rather take the power of the Guardian into death than allow another to have it. They felt theymight be
able to manipulate the child…me…better, and so they allowed it.
 “The power was too much,” said Medivh. “When I was a young man, younger than you, it awoke within
me, and I slept for over twenty years. Magna Aegwynn had so much of a life, and I seem to have lost
most of it.” His voice faltered again. “Magna Aegwynn…my mother…” he began, but found he had
nothing more to say.
 Khadgar just sat there for a moment. Then Medivh rose, shook back his mane and said, “And while I
slept, evil crept back into the world. There are more demons, and more of these orcs as well. And now
members of my own Order are once more playing the dark road. Yes, Huglar and Hugarin were
members of the Order, as have been others, like ancient Arrexis among the Kirin Tor. Yes, something
similar happened to him, and while they covered it up neatly, you probably heardsomething about it. They
feared my mother’s power, and they fear me, and I have to keep their fear from destroying them. Such is
the charge laid upon the Guardian of Tirisfal.”
 The older man launched himself to his feet. “I must be off!” he said.
 “Off?” said Khadgar, suddenly surprised by the energy within the lanky frame.
 “As you have so rightly noted, there is a demon abroad,” said Medivh with a renewed smile. “Sound the
hunter’s horn, I must find it before it regains its wits and strength and kills others!”
 Khadgar pulled himself upright. “Where do we start?”
 Medivh pulled himself up short, and turned, looking slightly sheepishly at the younger man. “Ah.We are
not starting anywhere. I am going to go. You’re talented, but you’re not up to demons quite yet. This
battle is my own, Young Apprentice Trust.”
 “Magus, I am sure I can…”
 But Medivh raised a hand to silence him.
 “I also need you here to keep your own ears open,” said Medivh, in a quieter voice. “I have no doubt
that Old Lothar has spent the past ten minutes with his ear to the door, such that there will be a
keyhole-shaped impression on the side of his face.” Medivh grinned. “He knows a lot, but not all. That’s
why I had to tell you, so he doesn’t pry too much out of you. I need someone to guard the Guardian, as
it were.”
 Khadgar looked at Medivh and the older mage winked. Then the Magus strode to the door and pulled it
open with a quick motion.
 Lothar did not stumble into the room, but he was there, right on the other side. He could have been
listening, or just standing watch.
 “Med,” said Lothar with a game smile. “His Majesty…”
 “His Majesty will understand perfectly,” said Medivh, breezing right past the larger man. “That I would
rather meet with a rampaging demon than the leader of a nation. Priorities and all that. In the mean time
will you look after my apprentice?”
 He said it all in a single breath, and then he was gone, out into the hall and down the stairs, leaving
Lothar in mid-sentence.
 The old warrior rubbed a great hand up over his balding pate, letting out an exaggerated sigh. Then he
looked at Khadgar and let out another, deeper sigh.
 “He’s always been like this, you know,” said Lothar, as if Khadgar truly did know. “I suppose you’re
hungry, at least. Let’s see if we can find some lunch.”

 Lunch consisted of a cold game fowl looted from the cold room and tucked under Lothar’s arm, and
two mugs of ale the size of ewers, one in each meaty hand. The King’s Champion was surprisingly at
ease, despite the situation, and guided Khadgar out to a high balcony overlooking the city.
 “My lord,” said Khadgar. “Despite the Magus’s request, I realize you have other work.”
 “Aye,” said Lothar, “and most of it was taken care of while you were talking to Medivh. His majesty
King Llane is in his quarters, as are most of the courtiers, under guard, in case that demon decided to
hide in the castle. Also I have agents already spreading through the city, with orders to both report
anything suspicious but not to make themselves suspicious. The last thing we need is a demon-panic. I’ve
cast all my lines, and now there is nothing to do but wait.” He looked at the younger man. “And my
lieutenants know that I’ll be on this balcony, as I always have a late lunch anyway.”
 Khadgar considered Lothar’s words, and thought that the King’s Champion was very much like
Medivh—not only planning ahead a few moves, but delighting in telling others how he’s planned things
out. The apprentice picked at the sliced breast meat while Lothar tore into a drumstick.
 The pair ate in silence for a long time. The fowl was anything but foul, for it was treated with a
concoction of rosemary, bacon, and sheep’s butter placed beneath the skin before roasting. Even cold it
fell apart in the mouth. The ale for its part was pungent, rich with bottomland hops.
 Beneath them the city unfolded. The citadel itself was atop a rocky outcropping that already separated
the King from his subjects, and from the tower’s additional height, the citizens of Stormwind looked like
naught but small dolls busying themselves along crowded streets. Some sort of market day was playing
out beneath them, brightly-tarped storefronts occupied with vendors bellowing (very quietly, it seemed to
Khadgar at this altitude) the virtues of their wares.
 For a moment Khadgar forgot where he was, and what he had seen, and why he was there in the first
place. It was a beautiful city. Only Lothar’s deep grumble brought him back to this world.
 “So,” said the King’s Champion in his way of introspection. “How is he?”
 Khadgar thought for a moment, and replied, “He is in good health. You have seen that yourself, milord.”
 “Bah,” spat Lothar, and for a moment Khadgar thought the knight was choking on a large piece of meat.
“I can see, and I know Med can dance and bluff his way past just about anyone. What I mean to say is,
Howis he?”
 Khadgar looked out at the city again, wondering if he had Medivh’s talent to bluster his way past the
older man, to deny answers without causing affront.
 No, he decided, Medivh played on loyalties and friendships older than he was. He had to find another
way to respond. He let out a sigh and said, “Demanding. He’s very demanding. And intelligent. And
surprising. I feel I have apprenticed myself to a whirlwind, sometimes.” He looked at Lothar, his
eyebrows raised, hoping that this would be sufficient.
 Lothar nodded, “A whirlwind, aye. And a thunderstorm, too, I suspect.”
 Khadgar shrugged awkwardly. “He has his moods, like anyone.”
 “Hmmpph,” said the King’s Champion. “An ostler has a mood and he kicks the dog. A mage has his
moods and a town disappears. No offense meant.”
 “None taken, milord,” said Khadgar, thinking of the dead mages in the tower room. “You ask how he is.
He’s all these things.”
 “Hmmmph,” said Lothar again. “He’s a very powerful person.”
 Khadgar thoughtand you worry about him like the other wizards do. Instead he said, “He speaks well of
you.”
 “What did he say?” said Lothar, more quickly than perhaps he meant to.
 “Only,” Khadgar chose his words carefully, “that you served him well when he was ill.”
 “True enough,” grunted the Champion, starting into the other drumstick.
 “And that you are extremely observant,” added Khadgar, feeling that this was a sufficient distillation of
Medivh’s opinion of the warrior.
 “Glad to know he notices,” said Lothar, with a full mouth. There was a pause between the two of them,
as Lothar chewed and swallowed. “Has he mentioned the Guardian?”
 “We have spoken,” said Khadgar, feeling that he was on a very narrow verbal cliff. Medivh did not tell
him how much Lothar knew. He settled for silence as the best answer, and let the statement hang in the
air for a moment.
 “And it is not the Apprentice’s place to discuss the doings of the Master, eh?” said Lothar, with a smile
that seemed just a jot too forced. “Come now, you’re from Dalaran. That nest of mage-vipers has more
secrets per square foot than any other place on the continent. No offense, again.”
 Khadgar shrugged off the comment. Diplomatically, he stated, “I notice that there is less obvious rivalry
between mages here than in Lordaeron.”
 “And you mean to tell me that your teachers didn’t send you out with a laundry list of things to pry out of
the high Magus?” Lothar’s grin deepened, and looked almost sympathetic.
 Khadgar felt some heat in his face. The older warrior was firing bow shots increasingly close to the gold.
“Any requests from the Violet Citadel are under Medivh’s consideration. He has beenvery
accommodating.”
 “Hmmph,” snorted Lothar. “Must mean they aren’t asking for the right stuff. I know the mages around
here, including Huglar and Hugarin, the saints rest their souls, were always pestering him for this and that,
and complaining to His Majesty or myself when they didn’t get it. Like we had any control over him!”
 “I don’t think anyone does,” said Khadgar, drowning any additional comment he might have made in his
ale.
 “Not even his mother, I understand,” said Lothar. It was a small comment, but it slipped in like a dagger
thrust. Khadgar found himself wanting to ask Lothar more about her, but contained himself.
 “I fear I am too young to know,” he said. “I’ve read some on her. She seems like a powerful mage.”
 “And that power is inhim, now,” said Lothar. She whelped him from a conjurer of this very court, and
weaned him on pure magestuff, and poured her power into him. Yes, I know all about it, pieced it
together after he went into that coma. Too much, too young. Even now I’m concerned.”
 “You think he’s too powerful,” said Khadgar, and Lothar froze him with a sudden, penetrating stare.
The young mage kicked himself for speaking his mind, practically accusing his host.
 Lothar let out a smile and shook his head. “On the contrary, lad, I worry that he’s not powerfulenough.
There are horrible things afoot in the kingdoms. Those orc-things you saw a month ago, they’re
multiplying like rabbits after a rain. And trolls, nearly extinct, have been seen more often. And Medivh is
out hunting a demon even as we speak. Bad times are coming, and I hope, no, Ipray, that he’s up to it.
We went for twenty-some years without a Guardian, when he was in a coma. I don’t want to go another
twenty, particularly at a time like this.”
 Khadgar felt embarrassed now. “So when you ask, How is he? You mean…”
 “Howis he?” finished Lothar. “I don’t want him weakening at a time like this. Orcs, trolls, demons, and
then there is…” Lothar let his voice trail off and looked at Khadgar, then said, “You know of the
Guardian, by now, I can assume?”
 “You can assume,” said Khadgar.
 “And the Order, too?” said Lothar, then he smiled. “No need to say anything, young man, your eyes
gave yourself away. Never play cards with me, eh?”
 Khadgar felt on the very precipice itself. Medivh warned him not to let too much loose to the Champion,
but Lothar seemed to know as much as Khadgar knew. More, even.
 Lothar spoke in a calm voice. “We would not send for Med for a simple matter of a magical misfire.
Nor even two common conjurers being caught in their own spells. Huglar and Hugarin were two of our
best, two of our most powerful. There was another, even more powerful, but she met an accident two
months back. All three, I believe, were members of your Order.”
 Khadgar felt a chill creep up his back. He managed to say, “I don’t think I’m comfortable speaking of
this.”
 “Then don’t,” said Lothar, his brows furrowed like the foothills of some ancient mountain chain. “Three
powerful mages, the most powerful in Azeroth. Not a patch on Med or his mother, mind you, but great
and powerful wizards nonetheless. All dead. I can buy one mage being unlucky, or being caught
unawares, but three of them? A warrior doesn’t believe in that much coincidence.
 “There’s more,” continued the King’s Champion. “I have my own ways of finding out things. Caravan
traders, mercenaries, and adventurers that come into the city often find a receptive ear with old Lothar.
Word comes from Ironforge and Alterac, and even from Lordaeron itself. There has been a plague of
such mishaps, one after another. I think someone, or worse yet, something is hunting the great mages of
this secret Order. Both here, and in Dalaran itself, I don’t doubt.”
 Khadgar realized that the older man was studying his face as he spoke, and with a start he realized that
this fit into the rumors he heard before leaving the Violet Citadel. Ancient mages, suddenly gone, and the
upper echelons quietly hushing it up. The great secret among the Kirin Tor, part of a greater problem.
 Despite himself, Khadgar looked away, out over the city. “Yes, Dalaran too, it seems,” said Lothar.
“Not much news comes from there, but I’m willing to bet that the news is similar, eh?”
 “You think that the Lord Magus is in danger?” asked Khadgar. The desire to not tell Lothar anything
was eroding by the obvious concern of the older warrior.
 “I think Medivh is danger incarnate,” said Lothar. “And I admire anyone willing to be under the same
roof with him.” It sounded like a joke, but the King’s Champion did not smile. “But yes, something is out
there, and it may be tied with the demons or the orcs or something much worse. And I would hate to lose
our most powerful weapon at a time like this.”
 Khadgar looked at Lothar, trying to read the furrows of the older man’s face. Was this old warrior
worried about his friend, or worried about the loss of a magical protection? Was his concern about
Medivh’s safety, out in the middle of the wilderness, or that something was stalking them all? The older
man’s face seemed like a mask, and his deep sea-blue eyes gave no clue as to what Lothar was truly
thinking.
 Khadgar had expected a simple swordsman, a knight devoted to duty, but the King’s Champion was
more than this. He was pushing Khadgar, looking for weakness, looking for information, but to what
end?
 I need someone to guard the Guardian,Medivh had said.
 “He is fine,” said Khadgar. “You are worried about him, and I share your concerns. But he is doing well,
and I doubt anything or anyone can truly hurt him.”
 Lothar’s unfathomable eyes seemed to deflate for a moment, but only a flickering moment. He was going
to say something else, to renew the prying, friendly inquisition, but a commotion within the tower drew
both their attention away from the discussion, away from the now-empty mugs and the bare bones of the
fowl.
 Medivh swaggered into view, followed by a crew of servants and guardsmen. All complained about his
presence, but none would (wisely) place a hand on him, and as a result followed him like a living,
mewling comet’s tale. The older mage strode out onto the parapet.
 “I thought you a creature of habit, Lothar,” said Medivh. “I knew you’d be out here taking afternoon
tea!” The Magus beamed a warm smile, but Khadgar saw there was a slight, almost drunken sway to his
walk. Medivh kept one arm behind him, concealing something.
 Lothar rose, concern in his voice. “Medivh are you all right? The demon…”
 “Ah, yes, the demon,” said Medivh brightly and pulled his bloodied prize out from behind his back. He
lobbed it at Lothar and Khadgar in a lazy, underhanded swing.
 The red orb spun as it flew, spilling the last bits of blood and brains out before landing at Lothar’s feet. It
was a demon’s skull, the flesh still adhered to it, with a mighty divot, like that of a great ax, driven into the
center, right between the ramlike horns. The demon’s expression, Khadgar thought, was one of both awe
and indignation.
 “You might want to have that stuffed,” said Medivh, pulling himself seriously to his full height. “Had to
burn the rest of it, of course. No telling what the inexperienced might do with a draught of demon’s
blood.”
 Khadgar saw that Medivh’s face was more pinched than it had been earlier, and that the lines around his
eyes were more prominent. Lothar may have caught it as well, and remarked, “You caught it quite
quickly.”
 “Child’s play!” said Medivh. “Once Young Trust here pointed out how the demon fled the castle, it was
a simple matter to track it from the tower’s base to a small escarpment. It was over before I knew it.
Before it knew it either.” The Magus swayed slightly.
 “Come then,” said Lothar, with a warm smile. “We should tell the King. There should be reveling in your
honor for this, Med!”
 Medivh held up a hand. “You may revel without us, I am afraid. We should get back. Miles to go before
we rest. Isn’t that right, Apprentice?”
 Lothar looked at Khadgar, again with a questioning, imploring look. Medivh looked calm but worn. He
also looked expectant for Khadgar to support him this time.
 The young mage coughed, “Of course. We left an experiment on the boil.”
 “Indeed!” said Medivh, picking up the lie immediately. “In our rush to get here, I had quite forgotten.
We should make haste.” The Magus wheeled and bellowed at the collected courtiers. “Make ready our
mounts! We leave at once.” The servants dissolved like a covey of quail. Medivh turned back to Lothar.
“You will make our apologies to His Majesty, of course.”
 Lothar looked at Medivh, then at Khadgar, then at Medivh again. At last he sighed and said, “Of
course. Let me lead you to the tower, at least.”
 “Lead on,” said Medivh. “Don’t forget to take your skull. I’d keep it myself, but I have one like it
already.”
 Lothar hefted the ram-headed skull in one hand and brushed past Medivh, leading into the tower itself.
As he passed, the Magus seemed to deflate, the air going out of him. He looked more tired than before,
grayer than he had been moments earlier. He let out a heavy sigh and headed for the door himself.
 Khadgar chased after him and caught him by the elbow. It was light touch, but the elder mage suddenly
pulled himself upright, flinching as if reacting to a blow. He turned to Khadgar, and his eyes seemed to
mist over for a moment as he looked at the younger mage.
 “Magus,” said Khadgar.
 “What is it now?” said Medivh in a hissing whisper.
 Khadgar thought about what to say, how to risk the Magus’s censure. “You’re not well,” he said,
simply.
 It was the right thing to say. Medivh gave an aged nod, and said, “I’ve been better. Lothar probably
knows as well, but he won’t challenge me on it. But I’d rather be home than here.” He paused for a
moment, and his lips formed a stiff line beneath his beard. “I was sick for a long time, here. Don’t want to
repeat the experience.”
 Khadgar didn’t say anything, but only nodded. Lothar now stood at the door, waiting.
 “You’re going to have to lead the way back to Karazhan,” said Medivh to Khadgar, loud enough for all
nearby to hear. “This city life takes too much out of a man, and I could use a nap about now!”
 Nine
 The Slumber of the Magus
 This is very important,” said Medivh, staggering slightly as he slid from the back of the gryphon. He
looked haggard, and Khadgar assumed the battle with the demon had been worse than even he let on.
 “I will be…unavailable for a few days,” continued the older Mage. “If any messengers arrive during this
time, I want you to keep track of my correspondence.”
 “I can do that,” said Khadgar, “easily.”
 “No you can’t,” said Medivh, starting roughly down the stairs. “That is why I need to tell you how to
read the ones with the purple seal. The purple seal is always Order business.”
 Khadgar said nothing this time, but just nodded.
 Medivh slid on the edge of the stairs and stumbled, pitching forward headlong. Khadgar lunged to grab
the older man, but the Magus had already caught himself against the wall and pulled himself upright. He
didn’t miss a beat, “In the library, there is a scroll. ‘The Song of Aegwynn.’ Tells of my mother’s battle
with Sargeras.”
 “The scroll that Guzbah wanted a copy of,” said Khadgar, now watching the mage carefully as he
lurched down the stairs ahead of him.
 “The very one,” said Medivh. “This is why he can’t have it—we use it as cipher for Order
communications. It is the master key. An identical scroll is with each of the members of the Order. If you
take the standard alphabet, and move everything down, so the first letter is represented by the fourth, or
the tenth, or the twentieth. It is a simple code. You understand?”
 Khadgar started to say he did, but Medivh was already hurrying on, almost urgent in his need to explain.
 “The scroll is the key,” he repeated. At the top of the message, you’ll see what looks like a date. It’s
not. It’s a reference to the stanza, line, and word you start at. The first letter of that word becomes the
first letter of the alphabet in the code. From there it proceeds normally, the next letter in alphabetic
progression would be the second letter of the alphabet, and so on.”
 “I understand.”
 “No, you don’t,” said Medivh, rushed now and tired. “That’s the cipher for the first sentence only.
When you hit a punctuation mark, you go to the second letter in the word. That becomes the equivalent
for the first letter of the alphabet for the cipher of that sentence. Punctuation is normal. Numbers are as
well, but they are supposed to write things out, not use numerals. There’s something else, but I’m missing
it.”
 They were outside Medivh’s personal quarters now. Moroes was already present, with a robe slung
over his arm and a covered bowl resting on an ornate table. From the doorway Khadgar could smell the
rich broth rising from the bowl.
 “What should I do once I decipher the message?” asked Khadgar.
 “Right!” said Medivh, as if some vital connection had snapped closed in his mind. “Delay. Delay first.
Day or two, I may be up to it after that. Then equivocate. I am out on business, may return any time. Use
the same cipher as you got, but make sure you mark it as the date. If all else fails, delegate. Tell whoever
it is to use their own judgment, and I will lend what aid I can at the soonest moment. They always love
that. Donot tell them I am indisposed—the last time I mentioned that, a horde of would-be clerics arrived
to minister to my needs. I’m still missing silverware from that little visit.”
 The old mage took a deep breath, and seemed to deflate, supporting himself against the door frame.
Moroes did not move, but Khadgar took a step forward.
 “The fight with the demon,” said Khadgar. “It was bad, wasn’t it?”
 “I’ve fought worse. Demons! Slope-shouldered, ram-headed brutes. Equal parts shadow and fire. More
beast than human, more raw bile than both. Nasty claws. That’s what you watch out for, the claws.”
 Khadgar nodded. “How did you defeat it?”
 “Massive trauma usually will force out the life essence,” said Medivh, “In this case, I took its head off.”
 Khadgar blinked. “You didn’t have a sword.”
 Medivh smiled wearily. “Did I say I needed a sword? Enough. More questions when I am up to it.” And
with that he stepped into the room, and the ever-faithful Moroes closed the door on Khadgar. The last
sound the youth heard was the exhausted groan of an old man who had finally found a resting place.

 A week passed, and Medivh had not emerged from his quarters. Moroes would shuffle upstairs with a
daily bowl of broth. Finally, Khadgar summoned sufficient nerve to look in. The castellan made no move
to protest, other than a monosyllabic recognition of his presence there.
 In repose Medivh looked ghastly, the light gone out of his shuttered eyes, the tension of life gone from
his visage. He was dressed in a long nightshirt, propped up against the headboard, supported by pillows,
his mouth open, his face pale, his usually animate form thin and haggard. Moroes would carefully spoon
the broth into Medivh’s mouth, and he would swallow, but otherwise not awaken. The castellan would
change the bedding as well, then retire for the day.
 Khadgar got a frisson of recognition, and wondered if this was the same scene that played out in
Medivh’s youth, when his powers first surfaced, and when Lothar tended to him. He wondered how long
the Magus would truly be out. How much energy had the battle with the demon taken out of him?
 Normal communications came in, written in common hand and clear language. Some were delivered by
gryphon-rider, others by horseback, and more than a few came with the regular supply wagons of
traders seeking to fill Moroes’s larders. They were for the most part mundane—ship movements and
troop drills. Readiness reports. An occasional discovery of an ancient tomb or a forgotten artifact, or the
recovery of a time-worn legend. The sighting of a waterspout, or a great sea turtle, or a crimson tide.
Sketches of fauna that may have been new to the observer, but were better duplicated in the bestiaries
already in the library.
 And mention of the orcs, in ever-increasing numbers, particularly from the east. Rising sightings of them
in the vicinity of the Black Morass. Increased guards on the caravans, locations of temporary camps,
reports of raids, robberies, and mysterious disappearances. An increase in refugees heading for the
protection of the larger walled towns and cities. And sketches from the survivors and the slant-browed,
heavy-jawed creatures, including a detailed description of the powerful muscular systems that, Khadgar
realized with a start, could only come from vivisecting the subject.
 Khadgar began to read the mail to the wizard as he slept, reading aloud the more interesting or
humorous bits. The Magus made no response to encourage the younger mage, but neither did he forbid
it.
 The first purple-sealed letter arrived and Khadgar was immediately lost. Some of the letters made sense,
but others quickly descended into gibberish. At first the younger mage panicked, sure that he had
misunderstood some basic instruction. After a day of littering the quarters with notes and failed attempts,
Khadgar realized what he had been missing—that the space between the words was considered a letter
in the Order’s cipher, shifting everything one more letter in the process. Once that realization dawned, the
missive deciphered easily.
 It was less impressive than it had seemed earlier when it was gibberish. A note from the far south, the
peninsula of Ulmat Thondr, noting that all was quiet, there were no signs of orcs (though there was a rise
in the number of jungle trolls of late) and that a new comet was visible along the southern horizon, with
detailed notes (written out in words, not numbers). No response was requested, and Khadgar set it, and
its translation, aside.
 Khadgar wondered why the Order did not use a magical encoding or spell-based script. Perhaps not all
members of the Order of Tirisfal were mages. Or that they were trying to hide it from other wizards, like
Guzbah, and putting it in a magical script would draw their curiosity like bees to nectar. Most likely,
Khadgar decided, it was out of Medivh’s sheer cussedness to the point of making the other members of
the Order use a poem praising his mother as the key.
 A large package arrived from Lothar, distilling the previously-reported orc sightings and attacks and
translating them onto a large map. Indeed, it seemed like armies of orcs were pouring out of the swampy
territory of the Black Morass itself. Again, no response was asked. Khadgar considered sending Lothar
a note regarding Medivh’s state, but thought better of it. What could the Champion do, in any event,
other than to worry? He did send a note, over his own signature, thanking him for the information and
asking to be kept apprised.
 A second week passed and they moved into a third, the master comatose, the student searching. Now
armed with proper key, Khadgar started going through the older mail, some of it still held shut by violet
dabs of sealing wax. Going through the old documents, Khadgar began to understand Medivh’s often
ambivalent feelings toward the Order. Oftimes the letters were little more than demands—this
enchantment, that bit of information, a summons to come at once because the cows are off their feed or
their milk has gone sour. The more complementary of the missives usually held some sort of sting—a
request for a desired spell or a lost tome, wrapped up within its florid praise. Many held nothing but
pedantic advice, pointing out in detail how this candidate or that would be a perfect apprentice (these
were mostly unopened, he noticed). And there were continual reports of no news, no changes, nothing
out of the ordinary.
 The latter changed within the more recent messages (they were not dated, but Khadgar began to
determine where they fell within a timeline, both by the yellowing of the parchment and the increasing
fever pitch of demands and advice). The tone became more consolatory with the sudden appearance of
the orcs, particularly as they started raiding caravans. But the undercurrent of demands on Medivh’s time
remained, and even increased.
 Khadgar looked at the old man lying on the bed and wondered what would possess him to help these
people and help them on a regular basis.
 And then there were the mystery letters—the occasional thanks, the references to some arcane text, a
response to an unknown question—“Yes,” “No,” and “The emu, of course.” During his vigil at Medivh’s
bedside one mystery letter arrived, without signature. It read “Prepare quarters. The Emissary will arrive
shortly.”
 At the end of the third week two letters arrived one evening with a traveling merchant, one with the
purple seal, the other red-sealed and addressed to Khadgar himself. Both were from the Violet Citadel
of the Kirin Tor.
 The letter to Khadgar began, in a spidery hand, “We regret to inform you of the sudden and unexpected
death of the instructor mage Guzbah. We understand you have been in correspondence with the late
mage and we share your emotion and sympathy at this time. If you have any correspondence, moneys, or
information currently due to Guzbah, or are in possession of any of his property (in particular any of his
books on loan), the return of that correspondence, money, information, or property would be
appreciated, sent to the below address.” A set of numbers and a lazy, illegible scrawl marked the bottom
of the letter.
 Khadgar felt as if he had been struck in the gut. Guzbah, dead? He turned the letter over, but no further
information fell out. Stunned, he reached for the purple-sealed letter. This was in the same spider-hand,
but once it was decoded held more information.
 Guzbah was found slain in the library on the eve of the Feast of Scribes, in the midst of a reviewing
Denbrawn’s Treatise on the “Song of Aegwynn.” (Khadgar felt a pang of remorse for not sending his
former instructor the scroll.) He was apparently taken by surprise from a beast (presumably summoned)
which ripped him apart. The death was quick but painful, and the explanation of how the body was found
detailed to the point of excess. From the description of the body and the shambles of the library,
Khadgar could only conclude that the “summoned beast” was a demon of the type Medivh had fought in
Stormwind.
 The letter continued, the words maintaining a cold, analytical tone that Khadgar found excessive. The
writer noted that this was the seventh death within the year of a mage of the Violet Citadel, including that
of the archmage Arrexis. It went on further to note that this was the first death of this type where the
victim was not a member of the Order itself. The writer wanted to know if Medivh had been in contact
with Guzbah, either directly or through his apprentice (Khadgar had a moment of déjà vu looking at his
own name in print). The unknown author went forward to speculate that since he was not a member of
the Order, Guzbah might be responsible for the summoning of the beast for some other matter, and if this
was the case, then Medivh should be aware that Khadgar had been Guzbah’s student at one point.
 Khadgar felt a sharp pain of anger. How dare this mysterious writer (it had to be someone high within
the Kirin Tor hierarchy, but Khadgar had no idea who) impinge both Guzbah and himself! Khadgar
wasn’t even present when Guzbah was killed! Perhaps this writer was the one responsible, or someone
like Korrigan—the librarian was always researching demon-worshipers. Casting accusations about like
that!
 Khadgar shook his head and took a deep breath. No, such speculation was futile and fueled only by
personal indignation, like so much of the politics of the Kirin Tor. The anger faded to sadness and
realization that the mighty mages of the Violet Citadel were unable to stop this, that seven wizards (six of
them members of this supposedly secret and powerful Order) had died, and all this writer could do was
cast about aspersions in the desperate hope that there would be no additional deaths. Khadgar thought of
Medivh’s quick and decisive actions at Stormwind Keep, and marveled that there was no one of equal
wit, drive, and intelligence within his own community.
 The young mage picked up the encoded letter and examined it again in the wan candlelight. The Feast of
Scribes was over a month and a half ago. It took this long for the message to cross the sea and reach
them overland. A month and a half. Before Huglar and Hugarin were killed in Stormwind. If the same
demon was involved, or even the same summoner, it would have to move between the two points very,
very swiftly. Some of the demons in the vision had wings—was it possible for such a beast to move
between the locations without anyone spotting it?
 An errant and unexpected breeze wafted through. The hairs on the back of Khadgar’s neck began to
bristle, and he looked up in time to see the figure manifest within the room.
 First there was smoke, red as blood, bubbling out from some pinprick hole in the universe. It coiled and
curdled upon itself like milk rising through water, quickly forming a swirling mass, through which stepped
the looming form of a great demon.
 Its form was reduced from when Khadgar had seen it before, on the field of snow in the timelost vision.
It had shrunk itself to allow it to fit within the confines of the room. Still its flesh was of bronze, its armor
of jet-black iron, and its beard and hair of animated fire, huge horns erupting from a massive brow. It
was weaponless, but seemed to need no weapons, for it moved with the comfortable grace of a predator
that fears nothing.
 Sargeras.
 Khadgar was stunned into silence and immobility. Surely the wards Medivh had maintained would keep
such a beast at bay? Yet here it was, entering the tower, entering the Magus’s very room with the ease of
a noble entering a commoner’s shack.
 The Lord of the Burning Legion did not look around, instead glided to the foot of the bed. He stood
there for a long moment, the flames of his beard and hair flickering without sound, as he regarded the
unconscious form before him. The demon stood watching the sleeping mage.
 Khadgar held his breath and looked around the worktable. A few tomes, the candle backlit by a mirror
for greater illumination. A letter opener used to break the purple seals. The young mage slowly reached
for the opener, trying to move without attracting the great demon’s attention. His fingers wrapped around
it tightly, his knuckles white.
 Still Sargeras stood at the foot of the bed. A long moment passed, and Khadgar tried to will himself to
move. Either to flee or to attack. His muscles felt locked in position.
 Medivh shifted in his bedding, mumbling something unheard. The demon lord raised a hand slowly, as if
to pronounce a benediction on the Magus’s inert form.
 Khadgar gave a strangled cry and thrust himself up from his chair, letter opener clutched in his hand.
Only at this moment did he realize that he held the opener in his wrong hand.
 The demon looked up, and it was a lazy, smooth motion, as if the demon himself was sleeping, or far
underwater. It regarded the charging youth, hand raised in a clumsy attack with a short, sharp dagger.
 The demon smiled. Medivh shifted and muttered in his sleep. Khadgar drove the letter opener into the
demon’s chest.
 And through the creature’s body entirely. The thrust of his blow carried him forward, through the form of
Sargeras, and sent him spinning toward the opposite wall. Unable to stop, he slammed into the wall, and
the letter opener jangled to the stone floor.
 Medivh’s eyes popped open, and the Guardian sat up. “Moroes? Khadgar? Are you here?”
 Khadgar pulled himself to his feet, looking around. The demon had vanished, popped like a soap bubble
at the first touch of steel. He was alone in the room with Medivh.
 “What are you doing on the floor, lad?” said Medivh. “Moroes could have gotten you a cot.”
 “Master, your wards!” said Khadgar. “They have failed. There was…” he stumbled for a moment,
unsure that he should reveal he knew Sargeras by appearance. Medivh would catch something like that,
and pester him until he revealed how he knew it.
 “A demon,” he managed. “There was a demon here.”
 Medivh smiled, looking well rested, the color returning to his face. “A demon? I think not. Hold.” The
Magus closed his eyes and nodded. “No, the wards are still in place. It would take more than a catnap
for them to run out of energy. What did you see?”
 Quickly Khadgar recounted the appearance of the demon from the cloud of boiling red milk, of it
standing there, of it raising its hand. The Magus shook his head.
 “I think that was another one of your visions,” he said at last. “Some bit of time unstuck and displaced
that fell into the tower, quickly banished.”
 “But the demon…” started Khadgar.
 “The demon you described is no more, at least no more in this life,” said Medivh. “He was slain before I
was born, buried far beneath the sea. Your vision was of Sargeras, from ‘The Song of Aegwynn.’ You
have the scrolls there. Deciphering messages? Yes. Perhaps that’s what called that timelost wraith into
my quarters. You should not be doing work here while I slept.” He frowned slightly, as if he was thinking
if he should be more upset or not.
 “I’m sorry, I thought…I thought it would be best to not leave you alone?” Khadgar twisted it into a
question, and it sounded a bit foolish.
 Medivh chuckled and let a smile creep across his weathered features. “Well, I didn’t say you couldn’t,
and I don’t suppose Moroes would have stopped you, since that would reduce his need to be here.” He
rubbed a finger and thumb over his lips and through his beard. “I think I’ve had enough broth for one
lifetime. And just to reassure you, Iwill check the tower’s mystic wards. And show you how to do it as
well. Now, aside from demon visions, did anything happen while I was gone?”
 Khadgar summarized the messages he had received. The rising tide of orc incidents. Lothar’s map. The
mystery message about the Emissary. And the news of Guzbah’s death.
 Medivh grunted at the description of Guzbah’s passing, and said, “So they’re going to blame Guzbah
until the next poor sod gets sliced open.” He shook his head, then added, “Feast of the Scribes. That
would be before Huglar and Hugarin died.”
 “By about a week and a half,” said Khadgar. “Time enough for a demon to fly from Dalaran to
Stormwind Keep.”
 “Or a man on gryphon-back,” mused Medivh. “It’s not all demons and magic in this world. Sometimes a
simpler answer suffices. Anything else?”
 “It sounds like these orcs are becoming much more numerous and dangerous,” said Khadgar. “Lothar
says they are moving from caravan raids to attacks on settlements. Small ones, but there are more people
coming into Stormwind and the other cities all the time as a result.
 “Lothar worries too much,” said Medivh with a grimace.
 “He’s concerned,” said Khadgar flatly. “He doesn’t know what to expect next.”
 “On the contrary,” said Medivh, letting out a long, mournful sigh. “If everything you tell me is true, then
I’m afraid things are goingjust the way I expected!”
 Ten
 The Emissary
 With Medivh’s recovery things returned to normal, or as normal as anything was in the presence of the
Magus. When the Magus was absent, Khadgar was left with instructions as to honing his magical skill,
and when Medivh was in residence in the tower, the younger mage was expected to demonstrate those
skills at the drop of hat.
 Khadgar adapted well, and felt as if his power was a set of clothes, two sizes too big, that only now was
he growing into. He could control fire at will now, summon lightning without a cloud in the sky, and cause
small items to dance upon the table at the will of his own mind. He learned other spells as well—those
that allowed one to know when and how a man died from a single bone of his remains, how to cause a
ground-fog to rise, and how to leave magical messages for others to find. He learned how to restore the
age lost to an inanimate object, strengthening an old chair, and its reverse, to pull all the youth from a
newly-crafted club, leaving it dusty and brittle. He learned the nature of the protective wards, and was
entrusted with keeping them intact. He learned the library of demons, though Medivh would not permit
any to be summoned in his tower. This last order Khadgar had no desire to break.
 Medivh was gone for brief periods of a day here, a few days there. Always instructions were left behind,
but never explanations. Upon his return the Guardian looked more haggard and worn, and would push
Khadgar testily to determine the youth’s mastery over his craft, and to detail any news that had arrived in
his absence. But there was no further repeat of his comatose rest, and Khadgar assumed that whatever
the master was doing, it did not involve demons.
 One evening in the library, Khadgar heard noises from the common area and stables below. Shouts,
challenges, and responses, in low, illegible tones. By the time he reached a window overlooking that part
of the castle, a group of riders were leaving the tower’s walls.
 Khadgar frowned. Were these some supplicants turned away by Moroes, or messengers with some
other dark tidings for his master? Khadgar descended the tower to find out.
 He caught sight of the new arrival only briefly—a flash of a black cloak stepping into a guest room along
the lower levels of the tower. Moroes was there, candle in hand, blinders in place, and as Khadgar
slipped down the last few steps he could hear the castellan say “…Other visitors, they were less careful.
They’re gone now.”
 Whatever response the new arrival made was lost, and Moroes pulled the door shut as Khadgar came
up.
 “A guest?” asked the young man, trying to see if there was any clue of the new arrival behind him. Only
a closed door greeted his view.
 “Ayep,” replied the castellan.
 “Mage or merchant?” asked the young mage.
 “Couldn’t say,” said the castellan, already moving down the hall. “Didn’t ask, and the Emissary didn’t
say.”
 “The Emissary,” repeated Khadgar, thinking of one of the mystery letters from Medivh’s great sleep.
“So it’s political, then. For the Magus.”
 “Assume so,” said Moroes. “Didn’t ask. Not my place.”
 “So it is for the Magus,” said Khadgar.
 “Assume so,” said Moroes, with the same sleepy inflection. “We’ll be told when we need to know.”
And with that he was gone, leaving Khadgar to stare at the shut door.
 For the next day, there was the odd feeling of another presence in the tower, a new planetary body
whose very gravity changed the orbits of all the others. This new planet caused Cook to shift to a larger
set of pans, and Moroes to move through the halls at more random times than normal. And even Medivh
himself would send Khadgar on some errand within the tower, and as the young mage left he would hear
the whisper of a heavy cloak on the stonework behind him.
 Medivh volunteered nothing, and Khadgar waited to be told. He dropped hints. He waited patiently.
Instead he was sent to the library to continue his studies and practice his spells. Khadgar descended the
curved stairs for half a rotation, stopped, then slowly climbed back up, only to see the back of a black
cloak glide into the Guardian’s laboratory.
 Khadgar stomped down the stairs, considering options of who the Emissary was. A spy for Lothar?
Some secretive member of the Order? Perhaps one of the members from the Kirin Tor, the one with the
spidery handwriting and the venomous theories? Or maybe some other matter entirely? Not knowing was
frustrating, and not being trusted by the Magus seemed to make matters worse.
 “We’ll be told when we need to know,” Khadgar muttered, stomping into the library. His notes and
histories were scattered on the tables, where he left them last. He looked at them, and the schematics of
his vision-summoning spell. He had made a few amendments since his last attempt, hoping to temporally
refine its results.
 Khadgar looked at the notes and smiled. Then he picked up his vials of crushed gemstones, and headed
downward—putting additional floors between himself and Medivh’s audience chamber—to one of the
abandoned dining halls.
 Two levels lower was perfect. An ellipsoid of a room with stone fireplaces at each end, the great table
put into service elsewhere, the ancient chairs lined across the wall from the single entrance. The floor was
white marble, old and cracked but kept clean by Moroes’s relentless industry and drive.
 Khadgar laid out a magic circle of amethyst and rose quartz, still grinning as he laid out the lines. He was
confident in his castings now, and did not need his ceremonial conjuration robes for luck. As he laid out
the pattern of protection and abjuration, he smiled again. He was already shaping the energy within his
mind, calling the required shades and types of magic, conforming them to their requisite shape, holding
that fertile energy in abeyance until it was needed.
 He stepped within the circle, spoke the words that needed to be spoken, made the motions with his
hands in perfect harmony, and unleashed the energy within his mind. He felt the release as something
connected within his mind and soul, and he called the magic forth.
 “Show me what is happening in Medivh’s quarters,” he said, his mind giving off a nervous tic, hoping that
the Guardian’s wards did not apply to his apprentice.
 Immediately, he knew the spell had gone wrong. Not in a major fashion, with the magical matrices
collapsing upon themselves, but in a slight misfire. Perhaps the wards did work against him, redirecting his
vision elsewhere, to another scene.
 He knew he was off by several clues. First off, it was now daylight, Second, it was warm. And last, the
location was familiar.
 He had not been here before, exactly, at least not in this particular spire, but it was clear he was at
Stormwind Keep, overlooking the city below. This was one of the taller spires, and the room was similar
in general design to that where the two members of the Order had met their end months earlier. Yet here
the windows were large and opened onto great white parapets, and a warm scented breeze stirred
diaphanous draperies. Multicolored birds perched within golden hoops around the perimeter of the room.
 Before Khadgar a small table was set with white porcelain plates edged with gold, the knifes and forks
made of the precious metal as well. Crystal bowls held fruits—fresh and unblemished, the morning dew
still clinging to the dimples of the strawberries. Khadgar felt his stomach rumble slightly at the sight.
 Around the table hovered a thin man unknown to Khadgar, narrow-faced and wide-foreheaded, with a
slender moustache and goatee. He was draped in an ornate red quilt that Khadgar realized must be a
dressing gown, cinched at the waist with a golden belt. He touched one of the forks, moving it a
molecule’s length sideways, then nodded in satisfaction. He looked up at Khadgar and smiled.
 “Ah, you are awake,” he said in a voice that almost sounded familiar to Khadgar as well.
 For an instant, Khadgar thought that this vision could see him, but no, the man was addressing someone
behind him. He turned to see Aegwynn, as youthful and beautiful as she had been on the snowfield. (Was
it earlier than that date? Later? He could not tell from her appearance.) She wore a white cape with
green lining, but this was made of silk now, not fur, and her feet were shod not in boots but in simple
white sandals. Her blond hair was held in place with a silver diadem.
 “You seem to have gone to a great deal of trouble,” she said, and her face was unreadable to Khadgar.
 “With sufficient magic and desire, nothing is impossible,” said the man, and turned over his hand, palm
upward. Floating above his palm, a white orchid bloomed.
 Aegwynn took the flower, raised it perfunctorily to her nose, then set it down on the table. “Nielas…”
she began.
 “Breakfast first,” said the mage Nielas. “See what a court conjurer may whip up first thing in the
morning. These berries were picked from the royal gardens not more than a hour ago….”
 “Nielas,” Aegwynn said again.
 “Followed by slices of butter-fed ham and syrup,” continued the mage.
 “Nielas,” Aegwynn repeated.
 “Then perhaps some eggs of thevrocka, poached at the table in the shells by a simple spell I learned out
on the isles…” said the mage.
 “I am leaving,” said Aegwynn, simply.
 A cloud passed over the mage’s face. “Leaving? So soon? Before breakfast? I mean, I thought we
would have a chance to talk further.”
 “I am leaving,” said Aegwynn. “I have my own tasks to complete, and little time for the pleasantries of
the morning afterward.”
 The court conjurer still looked confused. “I thought that after last night you would want to remain in the
castle, at Stormwind, for a while.” He blinked at the woman, “Wouldn’t you?”
 “No,” said Aegwynn. “Indeed, after last night, there is no need for me to remain at all. I have attained
what I have come here for. There is no need for me to stay any longer.”
 In the present, Khadgar winced as the pieces fell into place. Of course the mage’s voice sounded
familiar.
 “But I thought…” stammered the mage Nielas, but the Guardian shook her head.
 “You, Nielas Aran, are an idiot,” said Aegwynn simply. “You are one of the mightiest sorcerers in the
Order of Tirisfal, and yet, you remain an idiot. That says something about the rest of the Order.”
 Nielas Aran bridled. He meant to look irritated, but only looked petulant. “Now, wait a moment….”
 “Surely you did not think that your natural charms alone brought me to your chamber, nor that your wit
and sense of whimsy distracted me from our discussion of conjuration rites? Surely you realize that I
cannot be impressed by your position as court conjurer like some village cowherd would? And surely
you must realize that seduction works both ways? You are notthat big an idiot, are you, Nielas Aran?”
 “Of course not,” said the court conjurer, clearly stung by her words but refusing to admit it. “I just
thought that, like civilized people, we might share a moment of breakfast.”
 Aegwynn smiled, and Khadgar saw that it was a cruel smile. “I am as old as many dynasties, and got
over my girlish indulgences early in my first century. I knew fully what I was doing coming to your
chambers last night.”
 “I thought…” said Nielas. “I just thought…” He struggled for the right words.
 “That you, of all the Order, would be the one to charm and tame the great, wild Guardian?” said
Aegwynn, the smile growing wider. “That you could break her to your will, where all the others had
failed, through your charm and wit and parlor tricks? Harness the power of theTirisfalen to your own
chariot? Come now, Nielas Aran. You have wasted much of your potential as it is, do not tell me that life
in the royal court has corrupted you utterly. Leave me some respect for you.”
 “But if you weren’t impressed,” said Nielas, his mind wrapping around what Aegwynn was saying, “if
you didn’t want me, then why did we…”
 Aegwynn provided the answer. “I came to Stormwind for one thing I could not provide for myself, a
suitable father to my heir. Yes, Nielas Aran, you can tell your fellow mages in the Order that you
managed to bed the great and mighty Guardian. But you will also have to tell them that you provided me
with a way of passing on my power without the Order having any further say in it.”
 “I did?” The results of his actions began to sink in. “I suppose I did. But the Order would not like…”
 “To be manipulated? To be countered? To be fooled?” said Aegwynn. “No, they will not. But they will
not act against you, for fear that I truly do have some romantic interest in you. And take this solace—of
all the mages, wizards, conjurers, and sorcerers, you were the one with the most potential. Your seed will
protect and strengthen my child and make him the vessel for my power. And when he is born and
weaned, you will even raise him, here, for I know he will follow my path, and even the Order would not
want to miss that opportunity to influence him.”
 Nielas Aran shook his head. “But I…” He stopped for moment. “But did you…” He stopped again. At
last when he spoke, there was finally some fire in his eyes, and steel in his voice. “Good-bye, Magna
Aegwynn.”
 “Good-bye, Nielas Aran,” said Aegwynn. “It has been…pleasant.” And with that she turned on her heel
and was gone from the room.
 Nielas Aran, chief conjurer to the throne of Azeroth, conspirator in the Order of Tirisfal, and now father
to the future Guardian Medivh, sat by the perfectly set table. He picked up a golden fork, turned it over
and over in his fingers. Then he sighed, and dropped it on the floor.
 The vision faded before the fork struck the marble floor, but Khadgar was aware of another noise, this
one behind him. The sound of a boot scraping against cold stone. The soft scraping of a cloak. He was
not alone.
 Khadgar wheeled, but all he caught was a tantalizing glimpse of a black cloak’s back. The Emissary was
spying on him. Bad enough he was sent away each time Medivh met with the stranger—now the
Emissary had run of the castle and was spying on him!
 At once, Khadgar was on his feet and rushing for the entrance. By the time he reached the doorway, his
prey was gone, but there was the sound of fabric brushing along stone down the stairs. Down toward the
guest quarters.
 Khadgar barreled forward down the stairs as well. The curve of the stairs would keep her to the outside
rim, where the footing was broader and more sure. The younger mage had raced up and down these
steps so many times he deftly danced down along the inner wall, skipping the stairs in twos and threes.
 Halfway to the guest level Khadgar could see his prey’s shadow against the outer wall. As he reached
the guest level itself he could see the cloaked figure, moving swiftly out through the archway and toward
its door. Once the Emissary reached the guest quarters, he would lose his chance. Khadgar vaulted the
last four steps in a single bound, and leapt forward to grasp the cloaked figure by the arm.
 His hand closed on fabric and firm muscle, and he spun his prey toward the wall. “The Magus will want
to know you’re spying….” he began, but the words died in his mouth as the cloak fell open to reveal the
Emissary.
 She was dressed in traveling leathers, with high laced boots and black trousers and black silk blouse.
She was well-muscled, and Khadgar had no doubt that she had ridden the entire way here. But her skin
was green, and as the hood fell back it revealed a jut-jawed, fanged orcish face. Tall greenish ears poked
up from the mass of ebony hair.
 “Orc!” shouted Khadgar, and reacted with an automatic response. He raised a hand, muttering a word
of power, summoning the forces to drive a bolt of mystic power through her.
 He never had the chance to finish. At the first opening of his mouth, the orc woman lashed out with a
roundhouse kick, bringing her leg up to chest level. Her knee brushed aside Khadgar’s pointing hand,
forcing his aim off. Her booted foot slammed into the side of Khadgar’s cheek, staggering him.
 Khadgar staggered back and tasted blood—he must have bitten his cheek as a result of the blow. He
raised his hand again to fire a bolt, but the orc was still too fast, faster than the armor-bound warriors he
had fought earlier. Already she had closed the distance between them, driving a hard fist into his stomach,
driving the wind from his lungs and the concentration from his mind.
 The young mage snarled, abandoning magic for the moment in favor of a more direct approach. Still
smarting from the blow, he spun to one side, grasping the woman’s arm and pulling her off-balance. A
surprised look crossed the woman’s jade-shaded face, but only for a moment. She planted her feet firmly
on the ground, pulled Khadgar toward her, and neatly broke and reversed the hold.
 Khadgar caught a whiff of spices as he was drawn close to the orc, and then she threw him, bodily,
down the hallway. He slid along the stone floor, bumping into the wall and at last coming to rest at
someone else’s feet.
 Looking up, Khadgar saw the castellan looking down on him, a look of vague concern on his face.
 “Moroes!” shouted Khadgar. “Get back! Fetch the Magus! We have an orc in the tower!”
 Moroes did not move, but instead looked up at the orcish woman with his bland, blinkered eyes. “You
all right, Emissary?”
 The woman smirked, her greenish lips tucked back, and wrapped her cloak around herself. “Never
better. Needed a little exercise. The whelp was kind enough to oblige.”
 “Moroes!” spat the younger mage. “This woman is…”
 “The Emissary. A guest of the Magus,” said Moroes, adding blandly, “Came to get you. Magus wants to
see you.”
 Khadgar pulled himself to his feet and looked sharply at the Emissary. “When you see the Magus,
you’re going to tell him you’re snooping around?”
 “Doesn’t want to see her,” corrected Moroes. “Wants to see you, Apprentice.”

 “She’s an orc!” said Khadgar, louder and harsher than he meant to.
 “Half-orc, really,” said Medivh. He was bent over his workbench, fiddling with a golden device, an
astrolabe. “I surmise her homeland has humans, or near-humans, or at least had them within living
memory. Hand me the calipers, Apprentice.”
 “They tried to kill you!” shouted Khadgar.
 “Orcs, you mean? Some did, true,” said Medivh calmly.“Some orcs tried to kill me. And kill you as well.
Garona wasn’t in that group. I don’t think she was, at any rate. She’s here as a representative for her
people. Or at least some of her people.”
 Garona. So the witch has a name,thought Khadgar. Instead he said, “We were attacked by orcs. I had a
vision of attacks of orcs. I have been reading the communications from all over Azeroth, speaking of
raids and attacks by orcs. Every mention of orcs speaks of their cruelty and violence. There seem to be
more of them every day. This is a dangerous and savage race.”
 “And she dispatched you easily, I assume,” said Medivh, looking up from his work.
 Despite himself, Khadgar touched the corner of his mouth, where the blood had already dried. “That is
completely beside the point.”
 “Completely,” said Medivh. “And your point would be?”
 “She is an orc. She is dangerous. And you have given her free rein in the tower.”
 Medivh grumbled, and there was steel in his voice. “She is a half-orc. She is about as dangerous as you
are, given the situation and inclination. And she is my guest and should be accorded all the respect of a
guest. I expect this from you regarding my guests, Young Trust.”
 Khadgar was silent for a moment, then tried a new approach. “She is the Emissary.”
 “Yes.”
 “Who is she the emissaryfor?”
 “One or more of the clans that are currently inhabiting the Black Morass,” said Medivh. “I’m not quite
sure which ones, yet. We haven’t gotten that far.”
 Khadgar blinked in surprise. “You let her into our tower, and she has no official standing?”
 Medivh laid down the calibers and gave out a weary sigh. “She has presented herself to me as a
representative of some of the orc clans that are presently raiding Azeroth. If this matter is going to be
solved by any manner other than by fire and the sword, then someone has to start talking. Here is as
good a place as any.And, by the way, this is consideredmy tower, not ours. You are my student here, my
apprentice, and are here at my whim. And as my student, as my apprentice, I expect you to keep an
open mind.”
 There was a silence as Khadgar tried to let this sink in. “So she represents whom? Some, none, or all of
the orcs?”
 “She represents, for the moment, herself,” said Medivh, letting out an irritated sigh. “Not all humans
believe the same thing. There is no reason to believe that all orcs do, either. My question for you is, given
your natural curiosity, why aren’t you already trying to pull as much information out of her as possible,
instead of telling me I should not do the same? Unless you doubt me and my abilities to handle a single
half-orc?”
 Khadgar was silent, doubly embarrassed both for his actions and for failing to see another way. Was he
doubting Medivh? Was there even a chance that the Magus would act in a fashion not to uphold his
Order? The thoughts churned within him, fueled by Lothar’s words, the vision of the demon, and the
politics of the Order. He wanted to warn the older man, but every word seemed to be turned back
against him.
 “I worry about you, at times,” he said at last.
 “And I worry about you as well,” said the older mage, distractedly. “I seem to worry about a lot of
things these days.”
 Khadgar had to make one last attempt. “Sir, I think this Garona is a spy,” he said, simply. “I think she is
here to learn as much as she can, to be used against you later.”
 Medivh leaned back and gave the young man a wicked smile. “That is very much the pot calling the
kettle black, young mageling. Or have you forgotten the list of things your own masters of the Kirin Tor
wanted you to wheedle out of me when you first got to Karazhan?”
 Khadgar’s ears were burning crimson as he left the room.
 Eleven
 Garona
 He returned to his (well, Medivh’s) library to find her going over his notes. An immediate rage
blossomed in his chest, but the sting of her blows, and Medivh’s chastisement, kept his anger in check.
 “What are you doing?” he still said sharply.
 Emissary Garona’s fingers danced up from the papers. “Snooping, I believe you called it? Spying?” She
looked up, a frown on her face. “Actually, I’m just trying to understand what you’re doing here. It was
left out in the open. Hope that is all right with you.”
 It is NOT all right with me,thought Khadgar, but instead he said, “Lord Medivh has instructed me to
extend to you every courtesy. However, he may take umbrage if, in doing so, I allow you to blow
yourself up in casting some ill-thought magical spell.”
 Garona’s face was impassive, but Khadgar noted that she did lift her fingers from the pages. “I have no
interest in magic.”
 “Famous last words,” said Khadgar. “Is there something here I can help you with, or are you just
snooping in general, seeing what you can come up with?”
 “I was told you had a tome on Azeroth’s kings,” she said, “I would like to consult it.”
 “You can read?” asked Khadgar. It sounded harsher than he meant it. “Sorry. I meant to say…”
 “Yes, surprisingly, I can read,” said Garona, quickly and officiously. “I have picked up many talents over
the years.”
 Khadgar scowled. “Second row, fourth shelf up. It’s a red-bound book with gold trim.” Garona
disappeared into the stacks, and Khadgar took the opportunity to gather up his notes from the table. He
would have to keep them elsewhere if the half-orc had free run of the place. At least it wasn’t Order
correspondence—even Medivh would have a fit if he turned over ‘The Song of Aegwynn’ to her.
 His eyes went to the section where the scroll used as the key was kept. From where he was standing it
looked undisturbed. No need to cause a scene here, but he would probably have to move it as well.
 Garona returned with a massive tome in her hand, and raised a heavy eyebrow at Khadgar, forming a
question. “Yes, that’s the one,” said the apprentice.
 “Human languages are a bit…wordy,” she said, setting the tome down in the empty space that
previously held Khadgar’s notes.
 “Only because we always have something to say,” said Khadgar, trying to manage a smile. He
wondered, did orcs have books? Did they read at all? They had spellcasters, of course, but did that
mean they had any real knowledge?
 “I hope I wasn’t too hard on you, earlier in the hall.” Her tone was glib, and Khadgar was sure that she
would rather have seen him spit out a tooth. Probably this was what passed for an apology among the
orcs.
 “Never better,” said Khadgar. “I needed the exercise.”
 Garona sat down and started pouring through the text. Khadgar noticed that she moved her lips as she
read, and she had immediately turned toward the back of the book, to the recent additions about King
Llane’s reign.
 Now, not in the immediate fire of combat, he could see that Garona was not the standard orc he had
fought earlier. She was lean and well-muscled, unlike the lumpy, rough brutes he had battled at the
caravan site. Her skin was smoother, almost human, and a lighter shade of green than the jade flesh of the
orcs themselves. Her fangs were a bit smaller, and her eyes were a bit larger, more expressive than the
hard crimson orbs of the orc warriors. He wondered how much of this was from her human heritage and
how much from being female. He wondered if any of the orcs he had fought earlier were female—it was
not obvious, and he had no desire to check at the time.
 Indeed, without the green flesh, the disfigured, tusked face, and the hostile, superior attitude she might
almost be attractive. Still, she was inhis library, and going throughhis books (well, Medivh’s library, and
Medivh’s books, but the Magus had entrusted them tohim).
 “So you are an Emissary,” he said at last. He tried to keep his words light and conversational. “I was
told of your impending arrival.”
 The half-orc nodded, concentrating on the words before her.
 “Who are you emissaringfor, exactly?”
 Garona looked up, and Khadgar saw a flicker of irritation beneath her heavy brows. Khadgar felt good
about bothering her, but at the same time wondered where the woman drew the line. He did not want to
push too hard or too fast, lest he earn another beating, or another curt dismissal by the Magus.
 At least this time he would get some information out before the battle. He said, “I mean, if you’re the
Emissary, that means that someone is giving you orders, someone is pulling your strings, someone you
have to report back to. Whom do you represent?”
 “I’m sure your Master, the Old Man, would tell you, if you asked,” said Garona smoothly, but her eyes
remained hard.
 “I’m sure he would,” Khadgar lied. “If I had the effrontery to ask him. So I ask you instead. Whom do
you represent? What powers have you been granted? Are you here to negotiate, or demand, or what?”
 Garona closed the book (Khadgar felt a small victory in distracting her from her task) and said, “Do all
humans think alike?”
 “It would be boring if we did,” said Khadgar.
 “I mean, does everyone agree about everything? Are people always agreeing to what their masters or
superiors want?” said Garona. The hardness in her eyes faded just a touch.
 “Hardly,” said Khadgar. “One reason that there are so many tomes is that everyone has an opinion. And
that is just the literate ones.”
 “So understand that there are differences of opinions among the orcs as well,” said Garona. “The Horde
is made of up of a number of clans, all with their own chieftains and war leaders. All orcs belong to a
clan. Most orcs are loyal to their clan and their chieftain.”
 “What are the clans?” asked Khadgar. “What are they called?”
 “Stormreaver is one,” said the half-orc. “Blackrock. Twilight’s Hammer. Bleeding Hollow. Those are
the major ones.”
 “Sounds like a warlike bunch,” said Khadgar.
 “The homeland of the orc peoples is a harsh place,” said Garona, “and only the strongest and best
organized survive. They are no more than what their land has made them.”
 Khadgar thought of the blasted, red-skied land he had seen in the vision. This was the orcs’ homeland,
then. Some wasteland in another dimension. Yet how did they get here? Instead he said, “So which is
your clan?”
 Garona gave a snort that sounded like a bulldog sneezing. “I have no clan.”
 “You said all of your people belonged to a clan,” said Khadgar.
 “I said allorcs, ” said Garona. When Khadgar looked at her blankly, she held up her hand. “Look at this.
What do you see?”
 “Your hand,” said Khadgar.
 “Human or orc?”
 “Orc,” said Khadgar. It was obvious to him. Green skin, sharp yellowing nails, knuckles just a shade too
large to be human.
 “An orc would say that it’s a human hand—too slender to be really useful, not enough muscle to hold an
ax or bash a skull in properly—too pale, too weak, and too ugly.” Garona lowered her hand and looked
at the young mage through lowered brows. “You see the parts of me that are orcish. My orcish
superiors, and all other orcs, see the parts of me that are human. I am both, and neither, and considered
an inferior being by both sides.”
 Khadgar opened his mouth to argue, but thought twice of the matter and kept silent. His first reaction
was to strike out at the orc he had found in the halls, not to see the human that was Medivh’s guest. He
nodded and said, “It must be difficult, then. Without a clan allegiance.”
 “I have turned it to my advantage,” said Garona. “I can move between the clans more easily. As a lesser
creature, I am assumed to not be always looking for an advantage to my native clan. I am disliked by all,
so therefore I am not biased. Some chieftains find that reassuring. It makes me a better negotiator, and
before you say it, a better spy. But better to have no allegiance than conflicting ones.”
 Khadgar thought of Medivh’s own castigation of his Kirin Tor ties, but said, “And which clan do you
represent at the moment?”
 Garona gave a wry, fanged smile. “If I said Gizblah the Mighty, what would you say? Or perhaps I am
on a mission for Morgax the Gray or Hikapik the Blood-render. Would that tell you enough?”
 “It might,” said Khadgar.
 “It wouldn’t,” said Garona, “because I made up all those names, just now. And the name of the faction
that has sent me here would mean nothing to you either, not at the moment. Similarly, the Old Man’s
stated friendship with King Llane means nothing to our chieftains, and the name Lothar is nothing more
than a curse invoked by the human peasants we encounter. Before we can have peace, before we can
even start negotiating, we have to learn more about you.”
 “Which is why you’re here.”
 Garona let out a deep sigh. “Which is why I am praying that you will leave me alone long enough so I
can figure out what the Old Man is talking about when we have our discussions.”
 Khadgar was silent for a moment. Garona opened the volume again, leafing through the pages to where
she had stopped. “Of course, that goes both ways,” Khadgar said, and Garona closed the book with an
exasperated breath. “I mean, we need to know more about the orcs if we’re going to do more than just
battle them. If you’re serious about peace.”
 Garona glared at Khadgar, and for a moment the young mage wondered if the half-orc was going to
leap across the table and throttle him. Instead, her ears perked up, and she said, “Hold on. What’s that?”
 Khadgar felt it before he heard it. A sudden change in the air, like a window had been opened elsewhere
in the tower. A bit of wind stirring up the dust in the hall. A wave of warmth passing through the tower.
 Khadgar said, “Something is…”
 Garona said, “I heard…”
 And then Khadgar heard it as well, the sound of iron claws scraping against stone, and the warmth of the
air increased as the hairs on the back of his neck rose.
 And the great beast slouched into the library.
 It was made of fire and shadow, its skin dark and containing the flickers of the flame within. Its wolflike
face was framed by a set of ram’s horns, that glowed like polished ebony. It looked biped, but walked
on all fours, its long front claws scraping along the stone floors.
 “What is…” hissed Garona.
 “Demon,” said Khadgar in a strangled voice, rising and backing away from the table.
 “Your manservant said there were visions here. Ghosts. Is this one?” Garona stood up as well.
 Khadgar wanted to explain no, that visions tended to encompass the area entirely, shifting you to the
new place, but he instead he just shook his head.
 The beast itself was perched in the doorway, sniffing the air. The creature’s eyes blazed with flame. Was
the beast blind, and could only detect by scent? Or was it detecting a new thing in the air, a spice that it
had not expected?
 Khadgar tried to pull the energies into his mind, but at first his heart quailed and his mind went empty.
The beast continued to sniff, turning in place until it faced the pair.
 “Get to the high tower,” said Khadgar quietly. “We have to warn Medivh.” Out of the corner of his eye
he saw Garona nod, but her eyes did not leave the beast. A trickle of sweat dropped down her long
neck. She shifted slightly to one side.
 The movement was enough, and everything happened at once. The beast crouched and leapt across the
room. Khadgar’s mind cleared, and with a quick efficiency he pulled the energies into himself, raised his
hand, and buried a bolt of mystic energy into the creature’s chest. The energy ripped through the beast’s
chest and splattered out its back, sending pieces of flaming flesh in all directions, but it did not deter it in
the slightest.
 It landed on the study table, its claws digging into the hardwood, and bounded again, this time for
Khadgar. The young mage’s mind went blank for a second, but a second was all it took for the
slope-shouldered demon to close the distance between them.
 Something else grabbed him and yanked him out of the way. He smelled musky cinnamon and heard a
deep-throated curse as he spun out of the path of the loping demon. The beast sailed through the space
that until recently had been occupied by the apprentice, and let out a scream of its own. A long ragged
tear had appeared along the creature’s left side, and was oozing burning blood.
 Garona released Khadgar from her grip (a weak, humanish grip, but still enough to drive the air from his
lungs). In her other hand, the apprentice noticed that Garona held a long-bladed knife, crimson with its
first strike, and Khadgar wondered where she had hid it while they were arguing.
 The creature landed, wheeled, and tried to make an immediate, clumsy second assault, its iron-shod
talons outstretched, its mouth and eyes blazing with flame. Khadgar ducked, then came up with the heavy
red volume ofThe Lineage of Azeroth’s Kings. He hefted the massive tome into the creature’s face, then
ducked again. The beast sailed past him, landing back near the door. It let out a retching, choking noise,
and shook his ramhorned head to dislodge the weighty grimoire. Khadgar saw there was a line of burning
blood etched along the creature’s right side. Garona had struck a second time.
 “Get Medivh,” shouted Khadgar. “I’ll get it away from the door.”
 “What if it wants me, instead?” responded Garona, and for the first time, Khadgar heard a ripple of fear
in her voice.
 “It doesn’t,” said Khadgar grimly. “It kills mages.”
 “But you…”
 “Just go,” said Khadgar.
 Khadgar broke to the left, and, true to his fears, the demon followed him. Instead of heading toward the
door. Garona broke for the right, and started climbing the far bookcase.
 “Get Medivh!” shouted Khadgar, darting down one of the rows of books.
 “No time,” responded Garona, still climbing. “See if you can delay it in one of the rows.”
 Khadgar turned at the far end of the long bookshelves, and turned. The demon had already leapt over
the study table and was now prowling down the row between the bookcases, between histories and
geographies. In the shadow between the rows the creature’s flaming eyes and mouth stood out in stark
relief, and acrid smoke now roiled from its wounded sides.
 Khadgar cleared his mind, stuffed down his fear, and fired off a mystic bolt. A globe of fire or a shard of
lightning might be more effective, but the beast was surrounded by his books.
 The bolt smashed into the creature’s face, staggering it back a pace. It growled and crept forward again.
 He repeated the process like a ritual—clear the mind, fight the fear, raise a hand, and invoke the word.
Another bolt splanged off its ebony horns, ricocheting upward. The beast halted, but only for a moment.
Now its maw seemed a twisted, flame-filled smile.
 A third time he invoked the power of the mystic bolt, but now the creature was close, and it flashed in its
face, but save for illuminating its amused features, did nothing. Khadgar smelled its sour, burning flesh,
and heard a deep clicking within the beast’s throat—laughter?
 “Get ready to run!” shouted Garona, from somewhere to his right and above.
 “What are you…” started Khadgar, already backing up.
 “Run!”she shouted, and pushed off with her feet. The half-orc had climbed to the top of the bookcases,
and now shoved them apart, toppling the cases like giant dominos. A deep crash of thunder resounded
as each bookcase tipped over its neighbor, spilling volumes and crushing everything in its path.
 The last bookcase smashed against the wall and splintered, the force of the impact driving it to the
ground. Garona slid down from her now wobbling perch, long-bladed knife drawn. She tried to peer
through the churning dust.
 “Khadgar?” she said.
 “Here,” said the apprentice, plastered against the back wall, where the iron pedestals rose to support the
upper stacks on the balcony above. His face was pale even for a human.
 “Did we get it?” she demanded, still in a half-crouch, expecting a new assault at any moment.
 Khadgar pointed to the edge of what was until seconds before the end of the row of shelves. Now the
entire lower floor was a ruins of shattered cases and ruined volumes. Reaching out of the tattered
wreckage was a muscular, mangled arm made of dull flame and twisted shadow. Its iron claws were
already red with rust, and warm blood was already pooling on the floor. Its outstretched hand was a
mere foot from where Khadgar splayed himself.
 “Got it,” said Garona, sliding the knife back into sheath beneath her blouse.
 “You should have listened,” said Khadgar, choking on the dust. “Should have gotten Medivh.”
 “It would have sliced you open before I got up two flights of stairs,” said the half-orc. “And then who
would be left to explain things to the Old Man?”
 Khadgar nodded, and then a thought furrowed his brow. “The Magus. Did he hear this?”
 Garona nodded in agreement. “He should have come down. We made enough noise here to wake the
dead.”
 “No,” said Khadgar, heading for the entrance to the library. “What if there was more than one demon?
Come on!”
 Without thinking, Garona drew her knife and followed the human out of the room.

 They found Medivh sitting in his laboratory, at the same workbench that Khadgar had left him no more
than an hour previously. Now the golden instrument he was working on was in twisted pieces, and an
iron hammer rested at one side of the bench.
 Medivh started when Khadgar burst into the room, followed closely by Garona. The apprentice
wondered, had he been dozing through all this?
 “Master! There is a demon in the tower!” blurted Khadgar.
 “A demon, again?” said Medivh wearily, rubbing one eye with the flat of his palm. “It was a demon the
first time. The last time it was an orc.”
 “Your student is correct,” said Garona. “I was in the library with him when it attacked. Large creature,
bestial, but cunning. Made of fire and darkness, and its wounds burned and smoked.”
 “It was probably nothing more than another vision,” said Medivh, turning back to his work. He picked
up a mangled piece of the device and looked at it, as if seeing it for the first time. “They happen here, the
visions. I think Moroes warned you about them.”
 “It was not a vision, Master,” said Khadgar. “It was a demon, of the type you fought at Stormwind
Keep. Something has gotten past the wards and attacked us.”
 Medivh’s gray brows arched in suspicion. “Something get past my wards again? Ridiculous.” He closed
his eyes and traced a symbol in the air, “No. Nothing is amiss. None of the wards are tripped. You are
here. Cook is in the kitchen, and Moroes is in the hall outside the library right now.”
 Khadgar and Garona exchanged a glance. Khadgar said, “Then you should come at once, Master.”
 “Must I?” said Medivh. “I have other things to worry about, of this I’m sure.”
 “Come and see,” said Khadgar.
 “We believe the beast to be dead,” said Garona. “But we don’t want to risk the lives of your servants on
our beliefs.”
 Medivh looked at the smashed device, shook his head, and set it down. He seemed irritated by it. “As
you wish. Apprentices are not supposed to be this much trouble.”
 By the time they reached the library, however, Moroes was standing there, dustpan and broom in hand,
surveying the damage. He looked up, slightly lost, as the two mages and the half-orc entered.
 “Congratulations,” said Medivh, the lines of his frown cutting deeply across his face. “I think it’s a bigger
mess now than when you first arrived. At least then I had shelving. Where is this supposed demon?”
 Khadgar walked over to where the demon’s hand had jutted out, but now all that remained was one of
the bookcases pressed flat on the floor. Even the blood was missing.
 “It was here,” said Garona, looking as surprised as Khadgar. “It came in, and attacked us.” She grasped
the edge of the case, trying to pry it up, but the massive oak was too heavy for her. After she struggled a
moment, she said, “We both saw it.”
 “You saw a vision,” said Medivh sternly. “Didn’t Moroes warn you about this?”
 “Ayep,” confirmed Moroes. “I did at that.” He tapped the sides of his blinders for effect.
 “Master, it did attack us,” said Khadgar. “We damaged it with our own spells. The Emissary here
wounded it, twice.”
 “Hmmph,” grunted the Magus. “More likely you overreacted when you saw it, and did most of the
damage yourselves. These are fresh scratches on the table. From the demon?”
 “He had iron claws,” said Khadgar.
 “Or perhaps from your own mystic bolts, flung around like beads at a Stormwind streetfair?” Medivh
shook his head.
 “My knife bit into something hard and leathery,” said Garona.
 “No doubt some of the books themselves,” said the Magus. “No, were there a demon, its body would
still be here. Unless someone cleaned it up. Moroes, do you happen to have a demon in your dustbin?”
 “Don’t believe so,” said the castellan. “I could check.”
 “Don’t worry, but leave your tools for these two.” To the younger mage and the half-orc he said, “I
expect you to get along. In light of this, you two get to straighten up the library. Young Trust, you have
betrayed your name, and so must make restitution now.”
 Garona would not relent, “But I saw—”
 “You saw a phantom,” interrupted Medivh in an authoritative tone, his brows knitted. “You saw a piece
of somewhere else. It would not have harmed you. It never does. Your friend here,” and he motioned at
Khadgar, “tends to see demons where there are none. That worries me a bit. Perhaps you can try not to
see any when you are cleaning up. Until you do, I am not to be disturbed!”
 And with that, he was gone. Moroes laid the broom and dustpan on the floor and followed him.
 Khadgar looked around at the debris of the room. More than just a broom would be needed here.
Cases were toppled and in a couple places shattered entirely, and books were flung randomly about,
some with their spines broken and their covers torn. Could it have been a time-lost vision?”
 “This was no illusion that attacked us,” said Garona moodily.
 “I know,” said Khadgar.
 “So why doesn’t he see it?” asked the half-orc.
 “That I don’t know,” said the apprentice. “And I worry about finding out the answer.”
 Twelve
 Life in Wartime
 It took only several days to put the library back in proper order. Most of the scattered books were at
least near to where they needed to be, and the rarer, more magical, and trapped volumes were on the
upper balcony and had been untouched by the fracas. Rebuilding some of the cases took time, however,
and Garona and Khadgar turned the empty stables into a makeshift carpentry shop, and they tried to
restore (and in some cases replace) the shattered cases.
 Of the demon, there was no trace, save for the damage wrought. The claw marks remained in the table,
and the pages ofThe Lineage of Azeroth’s Kings were badly mangled and torn, as if by massive jaws.
Yet there was no body, no blood, no remains to drop at Medivh’s feet.
 “Maybe it was rescued,” suggested Garona.
 “It was pretty dead when we left it,” responded Khadgar, at the time trying to remember if he had put
epic poetry on the shelf above or below romantic epics.
 “Something rescued the body,” said Garona. “The same person who popped it in here would have
popped him out.”
 “And the blood as well,” reminded Khadgar.
 “And blood as well,” repeated the half-orc. “Perhaps it was a tidy demon.”
 “That’s not the way magic works,” said Khadgar.
 “Perhaps not your magic, the magic you learned,” said Garona. “Other peoples could have other magics.
The old shamans among the orcs had one way of magic, the warlocks that cast spells have different ones.
Maybe it’s a spell you never heard of.”
 “No,” said Khadgar simply. “It would have left some kind of a marker. A bit of the caster behind. Some
residual energy that I could feel, even if I could not identify it. The only spellcasters active in the tower
have been myself and the Magus. I know that through my own spells. And I checked the wards. Medivh
was right—they were all operating. No one should have been able to break into the tower, magically or
otherwise.”
 Garona shrugged. “But there are odd things about this tower as well, correct? Could the old rules not
apply here?”
 It was Khadgar’s turn to shrug. “If that’s the case, we’re in a lot more trouble than I imagined.”
 Khadgar’s relationship with the half-orc seemed to improve over the course of repairing the library, and
when his back was to her, or she was in the stacks, her voice sounded almost human. Still, she remained
guarded about whom she represented, and Khadgar for his part remained watchful. He kept track of
what references she used and what questions she asked.
 He also tried to keep track of any communications she made, to the point of wrapping the guest quarters
with his own web of detection spells, to inform him if she had left the room or sent word out. If she had,
her methods foiled even Khadgar’s detection, which made him more nervous as opposed to assuring
him. If she was doing anything with the knowledge she had gained, she was keeping it to herself.
 And true to her word, Garona began sharing her own knowledge about the orcs. Khadgar began to
assemble a picture of how the orcs were ruled (by strength and warrior prowess) as well as the different
clans within. Once she got rolling, the Emissary made very clear her opinion of the various clans, whose
leaders she tended to think of as lumpen oafs who are only thinking of where their next battle is coming
from. As she described the multi-clan orcish nation, the Horde, Khadgar quickly understood that the
dynamics were ever-changing and fluid at best.
 A large chunk of the Horde was the conservative Bleeding Hollow clan. A powerful group with a long
history of conquest, the clan was less powerful in that its aged leader, Kilrogg Deadeye, had become
more unwilling to throw lives away in combat. Garona explained that in orcish politics, older orcs become
more pragmatic, which is often mistaken for cowardice by the younger generation. Kilrogg had killed
three of his sons and two grandsons already who thought they could rule the clan better.
 The clan known as the Blackrock appeared to have another large chunk of the Horde, its leader was
Blackhand, who had as his chief recommendation for leader the ability to thump anyone else who wanted
the title. A chunk of Blackrock had already splintered off, knocked out a tooth, and called themselves the
Black Tooth Grin. Charming names.
 There were other clans: Twilight’s Hammer, which reveled in destruction, and the Burning Blade, who
seemed to have no leader, but rather served as an anarchic gathering within the chaos of the Horde. And
smaller clans, like the Stormreavers, that were led by a warlock. Khadgar suspected that Garona was
reporting to someone within the Stormreavers, if only because she had less to complain about with them
than the others.
 Khadgar took what notes he could, and assembled into reports for Lothar. A larger amount of
communications was coming in from all points in Azeroth, and now it seemed that the Horde was spilling
out of the Black Morass in all directions. The orcs that were considered mere rumors a year ago were
now omnipresent, and Stormwind Keep was mobilizing to meet the threat. Khadgar kept the
ever-worsening news from Garona, but fed to Lothar what details he could glean, down to clan rivalries
and favorite colors (The Blackrock clan, for example, favored red for some reason).
 Khadgar also tried to communicate what he had learned to Medivh, but the Magus was surprisingly
disinterested. Indeed, the Magus’s conversations with Garona were not as common as they once were,
and on several occasions Khadgar discovered that Medivh had left the tower without informing him.
Even when he was present, Medivh seemed more distant. More than once Khadgar had come upon him,
seated in one of his chairs in the observatory, staring out into the Azerothean night. He seemed moodier
now, quicker to disagree, and less willing to listen than before.
 His disaffected mood was clear to the others as well. Moroes would give Khadgar a painful,
long-suffering look as he left the master’s chambers. And Garona herself brought up the subject as they
reviewed the maps of the known world (which were made in Stormwind, and as such woefully
incomplete even when talking about Lordaeron).
 “Is he always like this?” she asked.
 Khadgar responded stoically, “He has many moods.”
 “Yes, but when I first encountered him, he seemed alive, engaged, and positive. Now he seems more…”
 “Distracted?”
 “Addled,” said Garona, twisting her lips in disgust.
 Khadgar could not disagree. Later that evening, Khadgar reported to the Magus a slew of new message
translations, all with the purple seal, all begging for aid against the orcs.
 “The orcs are not demons,” said Medivh. “They are flesh and blood, and as such the worry of warriors,
not wizards.”
 “The messages are quite dire,” said Khadgar. “It sounds like the lands closest to the Black Morass are
being abandoned, and refugees flooding into Stormwind and the other cities of Azeroth. They are
pressed thin.”
 “And so they depend on the Guardian to ride to their rescue. Bad enough I must guard the watchtowers
on the Twisting Nether to watch for demons, and to hunt down the mistakes of these amateurs. Now I
must rescue them against other nations? Will I be asked to support Azeroth in a trade dispute with
Lordaeron next? Such matters should not be our worry.”
 “There may not be an Azeroth without your help. Lothar is…”
 “Lothar is a fool,” muttered Medivh. “An old mother hen that sees threats everywhere. And Llane is little
better, seeing nothing that could break his walls. And the Order, all the mighty mages, they have
quarreled and argued and spat among themselves so now they don’t have the power to repel a new
invader. No, Young Trust, this is the little stuff. Even if the orcs succeeded in Azeroth, they would need a
Guardian, and I would be here for them.”
 “Master, that’s…”
 “Sacrilege? Blasphemy? Betrayal?” The Magus sighed and pinched the bridge of his nose. “Perhaps. But
I am a man made old before my time, and I have paid a great price for my unwanted power. Permit me
to rail against the clockworks that rule my life. Go now. I’ll return to your tales of woe in the morning.”
 As he was closing the door, Khadgar heard Medivh add, “I am so tired of worrying about everything.
When can I worry about myself?”

 “The orcs have attacked Stormwind,” said Khadgar. It was three weeks later. He laid the missive on the
table between him and Garona.
 The half-orc stared at the red-sealed envelope like it was a venomous snake. “I am sorry,” she said at
last. “They will not as a rule take prisoners.”
 “The orc forces were repelled this time,” said Khadgar. “Thrown back before they reached the gates by
Llane’s troops. From the descriptions, it sounds like Kilrogg’s Bleeding Hollow and the Twilight’s
Hammer clans. There seemed to be a lack of coordination between the major forces.”
 Garona gave a bulldog-sneeze grunt and said, “The Twilight’s Hammer should have never be put on an
assault in a siege situation. Kilrogg likely was trying to decimate a rival, and use Stormwind as his anvil to
do so.”
 “So even in the midst of an attack, they continue to brawl and betray each other,” said Khadgar. He
wondered if his own reports to Lothar had given them the information they needed to break the assault.
 Garona shrugged, “Very much like humans.” She motioned to the books piled high on the study table.
“In your histories, there are continual justifications for all manner of hellish actions. Claims of nobility and
heritage and honor to cover up every bit of genocide, assassination, and massacre. At least the Horde is
honest in their naked lust for power.” She was silent for a moment, then added, “I don’t think I could
have helped them.”
 “The orcs, or Stormwind?” asked Khadgar.
 “Either,” said Garona. “I did not know about any attack on Stormwind, if that’s what you’re hinting at,
though anyone with half an ounce of sense would know that a Horde would strike against the biggest
target as soon as possible. You know that from our discussions. You also know that they’ll pull back,
regroup, kill a few leaders, and then come back in greater numbers.”
 “I can guess, yes,” said Khadgar.
 Garona added, “And you already sent a letter to the Champion at Stormwind just to that affect.”
 Khadgar thought he kept his face passive, but the orc emissary gave a wide smile. “Yes, you did.”
 Khadgar now felt his face turn flush, but pressed his point. “Actually, the question I have is, Why haven’t
you been reporting to your masters?”
 The green-fleshed woman leaned back in her seat. “Who’s to say I haven’t?”
 “I do,” said Khadgar. “Unless you’re a better mage that I am.”
 A small tic at the corner of Garona’s mouth betrayed her. “You haven’t been reporting in at all, have
you?” asked Khadgar.
 Garona was silent for a moment, and Khadgar let the silence fill the library. At length she said, “Let’s just
say I’ve been having a problem with divided loyalties.”
 “I thought you had no allegiances,” said Khadgar.
 Garona ignored him. “I was sent here, ordered here, by a warlock named Gul’dan. Spellcaster. Leader
of the Stormreavers. Very influential in the Horde. Very interested in the mages of your world.”
 “And the orcs have the tendency to strike the biggest target first. Medivh,” said Khadgar.
 “Gul’dan said Medivh was special. From which secret divination or spice-fueled meditation he used to
come to that conclusion, I don’t know.” Garona avoided Khadgar’s glance. “I met several times with
Medivh in the field, then agreed to come to the tower here as an emissary. I was supposed to trade basic
information and report back to Gul’dan as much as I could about Medivh’s strengths. So you were right
from the start—I was here as a spy.”
 Khadgar sat down across from her. “You wouldn’t have been the first,” he said. “So why didn’t you
report back?”
 Garona was silent for a moment. “Medivh…” she started, then stopped. “The Old Man…” another
pause. “He saw through it all at once, of course, and he still told me what I wanted to know. Most of it,
at least.”
 “I know,” said Khadgar. “He had the same affect on me.”
 Garona nodded. “At first I thought he was just being pompous, sure in his power, like some orc
chieftains I’ve known. But there’s something else. It’s as if he feels that by giving me the knowledge, he
knew I would be changed by it, and would not betray his trust.”
 “Trust,” said Khadgar. “That’s a big thing for Medivh. He seems to exude it. Standing next to him, you
feel he knows what he’s doing.”
 “Right,” said Garona, “and orcs are drawn to power naturally. I figured I could tell Gul’dan that I was
held prisoner, unable to respond, and so I learned more, and eventually…”
 “You didn’t want to see him hurt,” finished Khadgar.
 “As Moroes would say, ‘ayep’,” said Garona. “He put a lot of trust in me, and he puts it in you, too.
After watching your vision-power thing, I told him about it. I figured that might have brought the demon
down on us. He said he knew and it didn’t bother him. That you were naturally curious, and it served you
well. He stands by his people.”
 “And you can’t hurt someone like that,” said Khadgar.
 “Ayep. He made me feel human. And I haven’t felt human in a long, long time. The Old Man, Magus
Medivh, seems to have a dream of more than one force battling another for domination. With his power,
he could have destroyed us all, yet he does not. I think he believes in something better. I want to believe
his dream as well.”
 The two sat there for a while in silence. Somewhere in the distance, Moroes or Cook moved along the
hallway.
 “And recently…” said Garona. “Has he ever been like this before?”
 She sounded like Lothar—trying to ask without seeming too concerned. Khadgar shook his head. “He’s
always been erratic. Eccentric. But I’ve never seen him this…depressed.”
 “Brooding,” added Garona. “Neutral. Up to now I’ve always assumed he would be on the side of the
Kingdom of Azeroth. But if Stormwind itself is attacked and still he does nothing…”
 “It may be his own training,” said Khadgar, choosing his words carefully. He did not want to reveal the
Order to Garona, regardless of her current feelings. “He has to take a very long view on things. It
sometimes cuts him off from others.”
 “Which is why he takes in strays, I suppose,” said Garona. Another silence, then she added, “I am not
sorry that Stormwind repelled the invaders. You don’t destroy something like that from without. You
have to do something within to weaken the walls first.”
 “I’m glad you’re not there as a general,” said Khadgar.
 “Chieftain,” said Garona. “Like I’d get a chance.”
 “There is something,” said Khadgar, then stopped. Garona tilted her heavily mawed head toward him.
 “You sound like someone looking for a favor,” she said.
 “I have never asked you about troop strengths, and positions….”
 “About obvious spy stuff.”
 “But,” said Khadgar, “they were amazed by the huge numbers of orc warriors on the field. They fought
them back, but were surprised that the swamps of the Black Morass could hold that many soldiers. Even
now they’re worried about the forces that could be hiding within the marshlands.”
 “I know nothing of troop dispositions,” said Garona. “I have been here, spying on you, remember?”
 “True,” said Khadgar. “But I also know you talked of your homeland. How did you get from there to
here? Was it some spell?”
 Garona sat quietly for a moment, as if trying to resolve something in her mind. Khadgar expected a flip
comment, or a redirection of the subject, or even another question in response. Instead she said, “We
call our world Draenor. It is a savage world, filled with badlands and bluffs and hardscrabble vegetation.
Inhospitable and stormy…”
 “And it has a red sky,” added Khadgar.
 Garona looked at the young mage. “You have spoken with other orcs? Prisoners, perhaps? I was
unaware the humans took orc prisoners.”
 “No, a vision,” said Khadgar. The memory seemed half a lifetime away. “Much like you saw the first
time we met. It was the first time I had seen orcs. I remember there were huge numbers of them.”
 Garona let out a bulldog snort. “Your visions probably reveal more than you say, but you have a good
picture. Orcs are fecund, and large litters are common, because so many die before they reach a
warrior’s age.
 “It was a hard life, and only the strong, the powerful, and the smart survived. I was in the third group,
but still I was a near-outcast, surviving as best I could at the fringes of the clan. That would be the
Stormreavers, at the time, at least when the order went out.”
 “Order?”
 “We were put on the march, every warrior and every capable hand. Grunt labor and swordsmen, all
ordered to pack up their weapons, tools, and belongings, and head for the Hellfire Peninsula. There a
great portal had been erected by Gul’dan and other powerful warlocks. A portal that broke through the
space between the worlds.”
 Garona sucked on a fang, remembering. “It was a great set of standing stones, hauled there to frame a
rip in space itself. Within the rip were the colors of darkness, a swirl like oil on the surface of a polluted
pool. I got the feeling that rip had been forged by greater hands, and the warlocks had just contained it.
 “Many of the most hardened warriors feared the space between the pillars, but the chieftains and
underchiefs made passionate speeches about what was to be found on the other side. A world of riches.
A world of plenty. A world of soft creatures who would be easily dominated. All this they promised.
 “Some still resisted. Some were slain, and others were forced through with axes resting against their
backs. I was caught with a large group of laborers and shoved into the space between the pillars.”
 Garona fell silent for a moment. “It’s called the Twisting Nether, and it was both instantaneous and
eternal. I fell forever, and when I emerged into the strange light, I was in a mad new world.”
 Khadgar added, “After promises of paradise, the Black Morass would be quite a letdown.”
 Garona shook her head. “It was a shock. I remember quailing at the first sight of the blue, hostile sky.
And the land, covered with vegetation as far as the eye could see. Some could not take it and went mad.
Many joined the Burning Blade, the chaos orcs thronging beneath their fire-orange pennant, that day.”
 Garona stroked her heavy chin. “I feared, but I survived. And I found my half-breed life gave me insight
on these humans. I was part of an ambush party that attacked Medivh. He killed everyone else, but left
me alive, and sent me with a message back to the Warlock Gul’dan. And after a while, Gul’dan sent me
as his spy, but I found I had…difficulty…betraying the Old Man’s secrets.”
 “Divided loyalties,” commented Khadgar.
 “But to answer your question,” said Garona, “no, I don’t know how many clans have poured through
the Dark Portal from Draenor. And I don’t know how long it will take for them to recover. And I don’t
know where the portal came from. But you, Khadgar, can find out.”
 Khadgar blinked. “Me?”
 “Your visions,” said Garona. “You seem to be able to summon up the ghosts of the past, even of
faraway. I watched you call up a vision of Medivh’s mother when I first met you. That was Stormwind
we were at?”
 “Yes,” said Khadgar. “And that’s why I still think the demon in the library was real—there was no
background to the vision.”
 Garona waved off his comment. “But you can call up these visions. You can summon up the moment
when the rift was first created. You can find out who brought the orcs through to Azeroth.”
 “Aye,” said Khadgar. “And I bet it’s the same mage or warlock that has been unleashing demons. It
makes sense, that the two be linked.” He looked at Garona. “You know, that would not be a question I
would have thought of.”
 “I will provide the questions,” said Garona, looking very pleased with herself, “if you provide the
answers.”
 
 The empty dining room again. The ever-diligent Moroes had swept up the earlier casting circle, and
Khadgar had to recast it with streams of crushed rose quartz and amethyst. Garona fit lit torches into the
wall sconces, then stood in the center of the pattern, next to him.
 “I’ll warn you,” he said to the half-orc. “This may not work.”
 “You’ll do well,” replied Garona. “I’ve seen you do it before.”
 “I’ll probably get something,” said Khadgar. “I just don’t know what.” He made the motions with his
hands, and intoned the words. With Garona watching, he wanted to get everything just right. At last he
released the mystical energy from the cage within his mind and shouted, “Show me the origin of the rift
between Draenor and Azeroth!”
 There was a change in the pressure, in the very weight of the air around them. It was warm, and night,
but the night sky outside their window (for there was a window now in these quarters) was a deep red,
the color of old, dried blood, and only a few weak stars pierced the envelope.
 It was someone’s quarters, likely an orc leader. There were fur rugs on the floor and a large platform
that would serve as a bed. A low fire pit burned in the center of the room. Weapons hung on the stone
walls, and there were a plethora of cabinets as well. One was open, showing a line of preservedthings,
some of which might have once belonged to human or humanish creatures.
 The figure in the bed tossed, turned, and then sat up suddenly, as awakening from a bad dream. He
stared into the darkness, and his savaged, war-torn face was clear. Even by orc standards, he was an
ugly representative of his race.
 Garona let out a sharp gasp, and said, “Gul’dan.”
 Khadgar nodded and said, “He should not see you.” This, then, was the warlock that had sent Garona
to spy. He looked about as trustworthy as a bent gold piece. For the moment, he wrapped himself in his
furs, and spoke.
 “I can still see you,” he said. “Even though I think I am awake. Perhaps I dream I am awake. Come
forth, dream creature.”
 Garona gripped Khadgar’s shoulder, and he could feel her sharp fingernails dig into his flesh. But
Gul’dan was not speaking to them. Instead a new specter wafted into view.
 It was tall and broad-shouldered, taller than any of the other three. It was translucent, as if it did not
belong here either. It was hooded, and its voice reedy and distant. Though the only light was from the fire
pit, the figure cast two shadows—one directly back from the flames, the other to one side, as if lit by a
different source.
 “Gul’dan,” said the figure. “I want your people. I want your armies. I want your power to aid me.”
 “I have called upon my spirit protectors, creature,” said Gul’dan, and Khadgar could hear a tremor in
the orc’s voice. “I have called upon my warlocks and they have quailed before you. I have called upon
my mystic master and he has failed to stop you. You haunt my dreams, and now you come, a
dream-creature, into my world. Who and what are you, truly?”
 “You fear me,” said the tall figure, and at the sound of his voice, Khadgar felt a cold hand run down his
spine, “for you do not understand me. See my world and understand your fear. Then fear no more.”
 And with that the tall hooded figure shaped a ball out of the air, as light and clear as a soap bubble. It
floated, about a foot in diameter, and within it showed a tableau of a land with blue sky and green fields.
 The cloaked figure was showing him Azeroth.
 Another bubble followed, and then another, and then a fourth. The sun-dappled fields of summer grain.
The swamps of the Black Morass. The ice fields of the north. The shining towers of Stormwind Keep.
 And a bubble that contained a lonely tower cradled within a crater of hills, lit by clear moonlight. He was
showing the orc spellcaster Karazhan.
 And there was another bubble, a fleeting one, that showed some dark scene far beneath the waves. It
seemed an errant thought, one that was quickly eradicated. Yet Khadgar got the feeling of power. There
was a grave beneath the waves, a crypt, one that surged with power like a heartbeat. It was there for an
instant, and then gone.
 “Gather your forces,” said the cloaked figure. “Gather your armies and warriors and laborers and allies,
and prepare them for a journey through the Twisting Nether. Prepare them well, for all this will be yours
when you succeed.”
 Khadgar shook his head. The voice stung at him like an errant gnat. Then he realized who it was and his
heart quailed.
 Gul’dan was up on his knees, his hands clasped before him. “I shall do so, for yours in power most
supreme. But who are you truly, and how will we reach this world?”
 The figure raised his hands to his hood, and Khadgar shook his head. He didn’t want to see it. He knew
but he did not want to see it.
 A deeply lined face. Graying brows. Green eyes that sparkled with hidden knowledge and something
dangerous. Next to him, Garona let out a gasp.
 “I am the Guardian,” said Medivh to the orc warlock. “I will open the way for you. I will smash the cycle
and be free.”
 Thirteen
 The Second Shadow
 No!” shouted Khadgar, and the vision ebbed at once. They were alone in the dining hall once more, at
the center of an ornate pattern made of crushed agates and rose quartz.
 His ears tingled and the corners of his vision seemed to close in on him. He had sunk to one knee, but
was unaware that he had even moved. Above him and to his right, Garona’s voice sounded hushed,
almost strangled.
 “Medivh,” she said quietly. “The Old Man. It couldn’t be.”
 “It can be,” said Khadgar. His stomach felt like knotted snakes were churning within his flesh. His mind
was already racing, and though he fervently wished to deny it, he knew its destination.
 “No,” said Garona, grimly. “It must be a misfire. A false vision. We went looking for one thing and found
something else. You said that’s happened before.”
 “Not like this,” said Khadgar. “We may not be shown what we want, but we are always shown the
truth.”
 “Perhaps its just a warning,” said the half-orc.
 “It makes sense,” said Khadgar, and there was the sound of rust and regret in his voice. “Think about it.
That’s why the wards were still intact after we were attacked. He was already within the wards, and
summoned the demon within.”
 “It didn’t seem like him,” said Garona. “Perhaps it was an illusion, some magical fakery. It didn’t seem
like him.”
 “It was him,” said the apprentice, rising now. “I know the master’s voice. I know the master’s face. In
all his moods and manners.”
 “But it was like someone else was wearing that face,” said Garona. “Something false. Like he was a set
of clothes, or a suit of armor, that someone else was wearing.”
 Khadgar looked at the half-orc. Her voice was tremulous, and tears pooled in the corners of her wide
eyes. She wanted to believe. She truly wanted to believe.
 Khadgar wanted to believe as well. He nodded slowly. “It could be a trick. It still could be him. He
could be tricking that orc, convincing him to come here. Maybe a vision of the future?”
 Now it was Garona’s turn to shake her head. “No. That was Gul’dan. He’s here already. He herded us
through the portal. This was in the past, this was their first meeting. But why would Medivh want to bring
the orcs to Azeroth?”
 “It explains why he hasn’t done much to oppose them,” said Khadgar. He shook his head, trying to
loosen the thoughts that were lodged there. So many things suddenly made more sense. Odd
disappearances. Little interest in the increasing number of orcs. Even bringing a half-orc into the castle.
 He regarded Garona and wondered how deeply she was involved in the plot. She seemed completely
taken aback by the news, yet was she a conspirator, or another pawn in the shadowplay that Medivh
seemed to be running?
 “We need to find out,” he said simply. “We need to know why he was there. What he was doing. He is
the Guardian—we should not condemn him on a single vision.”
 Garona nodded slowly. “So we ask him. How?”
 Khadgar opened his mouth to respond, but another voice sounded through the halls.
 “What’s all this brouhaha?” said Medivh, rounding the corner at the dining hall’s entrance.
 Khadgar’s throat constricted and went dry.
 The Magus stood in the doorway, and Khadgar looked at him, hunting for something in his walk, his
appearance, his voice. Anything to betray his presence. There was nothing. This was Medivh.
 “What are you children up to?” said the Magus, his gray brows furrowing.
 Khadgar struggled for an answer, but Garona said, “The Apprentice was showing me a spell he was
working on.” Her voice fluttered.
 Medivh grunted. “Another of your visions, Young Trust? They’re bad enough around here, without you
calling up the past. Come out of there at once—we have work to do. And you as well, Emissary.”
 His voice was measured and understanding, but firm. The stern voice of the wise mentor. Khadgar took
a step forward, but Garona grabbed him by the arm.
 “Shadows,” she hissed.
 Khadgar blinked, and looked at the Magus again. Impatience showed on his face now, and disapproval.
His shoulders were still broad, he held himself upright despite the pressures on him. He was dressed in
robes Khadgar had seen him wear often before.
 And behind him trailed two shadows. One directly away from the torch, and the other, equally dark, at
an odd angle.
 Khadgar hesitated, and Medivh’s disapproval deepened, a storm gathering on his face. “What is the
matter, Young Trust?”
 “We should clean up our mess,” said Khadgar, trying to be light. “Don’t want to make Moroes work
too hard. We will catch up.”
 “Negotiation is not part of an apprentice’s duties,” said Medivh. “Now come here at once.”
 No one moved. Garona said, “Why doesn’t he come into the room?”
 Why indeed,thought Khadgar. Instead he said, “One question, Master?”
 “What now?” grunted the master mage.
 “Why did you visit the orc Gul’dan’s dreams?” said Khadgar, feeling his throat tighten as he asked,
“Why did you show the orcs how to come to this world?”
 Medivh’s glare shifted to Garona. “I was unaware Gul’dan told you of me. He didn’t strike me as being
unwise, or a chatterbox.”
 Garona took a step back, but this time Khadgar restrained her. She said, “I didn’t know. Until now.”
 Medivh snorted. “It matters little. Now come here. Both of you.”
 “Why did you show the orcs the way here?” repeated Khadgar.
 “You do not negotiate with your betters!” snapped the mage.
 “Why did you bring the orcs to Azeroth?” asked Khadgar, pleading now.
 “It is none of your business, child. Youwill come here! Now!” The Magus’s face was livid and twisted.
 “With respect, sir,” said Khadgar, and his words felt like dagger-thrusts, “no, I will not.”
 Medivh thundered in rage. “Child, I will have you…” and as he spoke, he stepped into the room.
 Sparks flew up at once, bathing the older mage in a shower of light. The Magus staggered back a step,
then raised his hands, and muttered a curse.
 “What?” began Garona.
 “Circle of Warding,” snapped Khadgar. “To keep summoned demons at bay. The Magus cannot cross
it.”
 “But if it only affects demons, why not? Unless…” Garona, looked at Khadgar. “No,” she said. “Can
the circle hold him back?”
 Khadgar thought of jackstraw laid across the wards in the tower at Stormwind, and at the energy
blossoming by the doorway. He shook his head.
 Instead he shouted at the Magus, “Is this what you did to Huglar and Hugarin? And Guzbah? And the
others? Did they figure things out?”
 “They were further from the truth than you were, child,” said the illuminated Magus through gritted teeth,
“But I had to be careful. I forgave your curiosity for your youth, and thought that loyalty—” He grunted
now as the protective wards resisted him. “—I thought that loyalty still mattered in this world.”
 The protective wards blazed as Medivh moved into them, and Khadgar could see the fields distorting
around the Magus’s outstretched palms. The flickering of the sparks seemed to catch Medivh’s beard on
fire, and smoke curled up like horns from his forehead.
 And then Khadgar’s heart sank, for he realized that what he was seeing was another image, this one laid
over the image of the beloved mage. The image that belonged to the second shadow.
 “He’s going to get through,” said Garona.
 Khadgar gritted his teeth, “Eventually. He’s pouring huge amounts of power into breaking the circle.”
 “Can he do that?” asked the half-orc.
 “He’s the Guardian of Tirisfal,” said Khadgar. “He can do whatever he wants. It just takes time.”
 “Well, can we get out of here?” Garona sounded panicked now.
 “Only way out is past him,” said Khadgar.
 Garona looked around. “Blow out a wall, then. New exit.”
 Khadgar looked at the stonework of the tower, but shook his head.
 “Well, try something!”
 “I’ll try this,” said Khadgar. Before them, the figure of Medivh, taller now and wreathed in lightning,
loomed up in the smoke.
 Calming himself, he pulled the magical energies into himself. He made the motions he had made only
minutes before, and intoned the words lost to mortal men, and when he had compressed the energies into
a single ball of light, he released it.
 “Bring me a vision,” said Khadgar, “of one who has fought this beast before!”
 There was a brief bit of disorientation, and for a moment Khadgar thought the spell had misfired and
transported them to the observatory atop the tower. But no, it was now night around them, and an
imperious, angry female voice split the air.
 “Youdare strike your own mother?” shouted Aegwynn, her own face livid with rage.
 Aegwynn stood at one end of the observatory deck, Medivh at the other. It was Medivh as he knew
him—tall, proud, and apparently worried. Neither she nor the past-Medivh paid any attention to either
Khadgar or Garona. With a start, Khadgar realized that the present incarnation of Medivh was present
as well, sparkling along one wall. The pair from the past ignored him as well, but the present-Medivh was
watching the spectacle played out before them.
 “Mother, I thought you were being hysterical,” said the past-Medivh.
 “So a mystic bolt would bring me to my senses?” snapped the previous Guardian. Khadgar saw that she
was much older now. Her blond hair was now white, and there were tight wrinkles around her eyes and
mouth. Still, she held the presence of the earlier forms he had seen. “Now,” she said, “answer my
question.”
 “Mother, you’re not seeing things right,” said the past-Medivh.
 “Answer,” snapped Aegwynn sternly. “Why did you bring the orcs to Azeroth?”
 “No wonder he was so testy when you asked him that,” said Garona. Khadgar shushed her, and kept an
eye on the present-Medivh. The present incarnation had ceased to press against the walls of the wards,
and his face seemed to have lost its emotion.
 “Mother?” said the present-Medivh. His face looked credulous.
 “You don’tHAVE an answer, do you?” said Aegwynn. “This is some little game you’re playing. Some
challenge for Llane and Lothar to amuse themselves with? The power of theTirisfalen is no game, child.
There are more orcs coming in all the time, and I am hearing of caravans being raided near the Black
Morass. A novice could track back to your Portal, but only your mother would be able to taste the
power that wrapped it. Again, child, how do you account for yourself?”
 Khadgar wilted under the older woman’s invective, and half-expected the past-Medivh to flee the room.
Instead, Medivh surprised him. He laughed deeply.
 “Does your mother’s disproval amuse you, child?” said Aegwynn sternly.
 “No,” said Medivh, flashing a deep, predatory grin. “But my mother’s stupidity does.”
 Khadgar looked across the room, and saw the present-Medivh flinch at the sound of his past
incarnation’s words.
 “You dare,” thundered Aegwynn, raising her hand. A sphere of blazing-white light erupted from her
palm and lanced toward the past-Medivh. The Magus raised a hand and turned it aside with ease.
 “I do, Mother,” said the phantom of the past. “And I have the power for it. The power that you invested
me with at my conception, a power that I did not want or request.” The phantom-Medivh gestured, and
the topmost floor was alight with a blazing bolt. Aegwynn caught the energy herself, but Khadgar noted
that she had to raise both hands, and still was staggered back.
 “Butwhy did you let the orcs into Azeroth?” hissed the older woman. “There is no need. You put entire
populations at risk, and to what end?”
 “To break the cycle, of course,” said the past-Medivh. “To smash the clockwork universe that you have
built for me. Everything in its place, including your child. If you could not continue on as Guardian, your
hand-picked, born and groomed successor would, but would be locked into his script as tightly as any of
your other pawns.”
 The present-Medivh had sunk to his knees, his eyes locked on the tableaux before him. He was
mouthing the words that his past-self had spoken.
 Garona tugged on Khadgar’s sleeve, and he nodded. The pair left the heart of the wards, and began to
edge around the room, trying to ease behind the present incarnation of the Magus.
 “But, the risk, child…” said Aegwynn.
 “Risk?” said Medivh. “Risk to whom? Not to me, not with the power of theTirisfalen at my command.
To the rest of the Order? They worry more about internal politics than demons. To the human nations?
Fat and happy, protected from dangers that they do not even know about? Is anyone important really at
risk?”
 “You’re playing with forces greater than yourself, Son,” said Aegwynn. Khadgar and Garona were
nearly to the door, but the present-Medivh was held rapt by the vision.
 “Oh, of course,” said the Magus’s past with a snarl. “Thinking that I could handle powers like that would
be the sin of Pride. Sort of like thinking you could match wits with a demon lord and come out on top.”
 They were behind Medivh now, and Garona reached for the knife inside her blouse. Khadgar stopped
her hand and shook his head. They slipped behind Medivh. Tears were starting to form at the old man’s
eyes.
 “What happens if these orcs succeed?” said Aegwynn. “They worship dark gods and shadows. Why
would you give Azeroth to them?”
 “Whenthey succeed,” said the past Medivh, “they will make me their leader. They respect strength,
Mother, unlike you or the rest of this sorry world. And thanks to you, I am the strongest thing in this
world. And I will have broken the shackles that you and others have placed on me, and I will rule.”
 There was a silence in the vision, and Khadgar and Garona froze, holding their breath. Would the
present Medivh notice them in the silence?
 Aegwynn, speaking from the years past, held his attention. “You are not my son,” she said.
 The present Medivh put his face in his hands. His past version said, “No. I have never been your son.
Never truly yours, in any case.”
 And the past Magus laughed. It was a deep, thundering laugh that Khadgar had heard before, on the icy
steppes, when last these two battled.
 Aegwynn looked shocked, “Sargeras?” she spat, in final recognition. “I killed you.”
 “You killed a body, witch. You only killed my physical form!” snarled the Medivh of the past, and
already Khadgar could see the overlay of the second being, the alternate shadow, that consumed him. A
creature of shadow and flame, with a beard of fire and great ebon horns. “Killed it and hid it away in a
tomb beneath the sea. But I was willing to sacrifice it to gain a greater prize.”
 Despite herself, Aegwynn put a hand over her stomach.
 “Yes, Mother dear,” said the past Medivh, the flames licking at his beard, the horns forming out of
smoke before his brows. He was Medivh, but Sargeras as well. “I hid in your womb, and passed into the
slumbering cells of your unformed child. A cancer, a blight, a birth defect that you would never surmise.
Killing you was impossible, seducing you unlikely. So I made myself your heir.”
 Aegwynn shouted a curse and lurched her hands upward, her anger wrapped around words not made
for human voices. A bolt of scintillating rainbow energy struck the Medivh/Sargeras creature full in the
chest.
 The phantom of the past staggered back one step, then two, then raised a single hand and caught the
energy cast at him. The room smelled of cooking meat, and the Sargeras/Medivh snarled and spat. He
invoked a spell of his own, and Aegwynn was flung across the room.
 “I cannot kill you, Mother,” snapped the demonic form. “Some part of me keeps me from doing that.
But Iwill break you. Break you and banish you, and by the time you’ve healed, by the time you’ve
walked back from where I will send you, this land will be mine. This land, and the power of the Order of
Tirisfal!”
 In the present day, Medivh let out the howl of a lost soul, screaming to the heavens for forgiveness that
will never be forthcoming.
 “That’s our cue,” said Garona, pulling on Khadgar’s robe. “Let’s get while the getting is good.”
 Khadgar hesitated for a moment, then followed her to the stairs.
 They tumbled down the stone stairs three at a time, almost slamming into Moroes.
 “Excited,” he noted calmly. “Problem?”
 Garona hurdled down past the castellan, but Khadgar grabbed the older man and said, “The master has
gone mad.”
 “More than usual?” replied Moroes.
 “It’s not a joke,” said Khadgar, then his eyes lit up. “Do you have the whistle to summon gryphons?”
 The servant raised a rune-carved piece of metal. “Wish me to summon…”
 “I’ll do it,” said Khadgar, grabbing the item from his hands, and hurtling after Garona. “He’ll be after us,
but you had better run as well. Take Cook and flee as far as you can.”
 And with that Khadgar was lost to view.
 “Flee?” said Moroes to the apprentice’s retreating form; then he snorted. “Wherever would I go?”
 Fourteen
 Flight
 They had made it several miles when the gryphon began to misbehave. Only a single beast had answered
Khadgar’s summons, and bridled as Garona approached it. Only by sheer strength of will did the young
mage get the gryphon to accept the half-orc’s presence. They could hear Medivh screaming and cursing
long after they have left the circle of hills. They tilted the gryphon toward Stormwind, and Khadgar dug
his heels deeply into the gryphon’s haunches.
 They had made good speed, but now the gryphon bucked beneath him, trying to tear at the reins, trying
to turn back toward the mountains. Khadgar tried to break the beast, to keep it to its course, but it
became increasingly agitated.
 “What’s wrong with it?” asked Garona over his shoulder.
 “Medivh is calling it back,” said Khadgar. “It wants to go back to Karazhan.”
 Khadgar wrestled with the reins, even tried the whistle, but at last had to admit defeat. He brought the
gryphon down on a low, bare tor, and slid from its back after Garona had climbed off. As soon as he
touched ground, the gryphon was aloft again, beating its heavy wings against the darkening air, climbing
to return the call of its master.
 “Think he will follow?” asked Garona.
 “I don’t know,” said Khadgar. “But I don’t want to be here if he does. We’ll make for Stormwind.”
 They stumbled about for most of the evening and night, finding a dirt track, then following it in the general
direction of Stormwind. There was no immediate pursuit nor strange lights in the sky, and before dawn
the pair rested briefly, huddling beneath a great cedar.
 They saw no one alive during the next day. There were houses burned to the foundations, and clumps of
newly hummocked earth that marked buried families. Overturned and smashed carts were common, as
were great burned circles heaped with ash. Garona noted that this was how the orcs dealt with their
dead, after the bodies had been looted.
 The only animals they saw were dead—disemboweled pigs by a shattered farmhouse, the skeletal
remains of a horse, consumed save for the frightened, twisted head. They moved in silence through one
despoiled farmstead after another.
 “Your people have been thorough,” Khadgar said at last.
 “They pride themselves on such matters,” said Garona, grimly.
 “Pride?” said Khadgar, looking around him. “Pride in destruction? In despoiling? No human army, no
human nation would burn down everything in its path, or kill animals without purpose.”
 Garona nodded. “It is the orc way—do not leave enough standing that their foes could use against them.
If they could not use it immediately—as fodder, as quarters, as plunder, then it should be put to the torch.
The borders of orc clans are often desolate places, as each side seeks to deny the other resources.”
 Khadgar shook his head. “These arenot resources,” he said hotly. “These are lives. This land was once
green and verdant, with fields and forests. Now it’s a wasteland. Look at this! Can there be any peace
between humans and orcs?”
 Garona said nothing. They continued in on silence that day, and camped in the shambles of an inn. They
slept in separate rooms, he in the wreckage of the common room, she moving farther back to the kitchen.
He didn’t suggest they stay together, and neither did she.
 Khadgar was awakened by the growls of his stomach. They had fled the tower with little but what they
had on their backs, and save for some foraged berries and ground nuts, they had not eaten in over a day.
 The young mage extricated himself from the raindamp straw tic that made his bed, his joints protesting.
He had not camped in the open since his arrival at Karazhan, and he felt out of shape. The fear of the
previous day had ebbed entirely, and he wondered about his next move.
 Stormwind was their stated target, but how would he get someone like Garona into the city? Maybe find
something to disguise her. Or did she even want to come? Now that she was free of the tower, maybe it
would be better for her to rejoin Gul’dan and the Stormreaver clan.
 Something moved along the wrecked side of the building. Probably Garona. She had to be as hungry as
Khadgar. She hadn’t complained, but he assumed from the wreckage left behind that orcs required a lot
of food to keep them in top fighting form.
 Khadgar stood up, shook the cobwebs from his mind, and leaned out the remains of a window to ask
her if there was anything left in the kitchen.
 And was faced with one edge of a huge double-bladed ax, leveled at his neck.
 At the opposite end of the ax was the jade-green face of an orc. A real orc. Khadgar had not realized
until now how accustomed to Garona’s face he had become, such that the heavy jaw and sloped brow
were a shock to him.
 The orc growled, “Wuzzat?”
 Khadgar slowly raised both hands, all the while calling up in his mind the magical energy. A simple spell,
enough to knock the creature aside, to get Garona and get away.
 Unless Garona had brought them here, he suddenly realized.
 He hesitated, and that was enough. He heard something behind him, but did not get to turn as something
large and heavy came down on the back of his neck.
 He could not have been out long—long enough for a half-dozen orcs to spill into the room and start
pushing through the rubble with their axes. They wore green armbands. Bleeding Hollow clan, his
memory told him. He stirred, and the first orc, the one with the double-bladed ax, spun on him again.
 “Wharsyurstuth?” said the orc. “Wharyuhidit?”
 “What?” asked Khadgar, wondering if it was the orc’s voice or his own ears that were mangling the
language.
 “Your stuff,” said the orc, slower. “Your gear. You gots nothing. Where did you hide it?”
 Khadgar spoke without thinking. “No stuff. Lost it earlier. No stuff.”
 The orc snorted. “Then you die,” he snarled, and raised his blade.
 “No!” shouted Garona from the ruined doorway. She looked like she had spent a bad night, but had a
brace of hares on a leather thong hanging from her belt. She had been out hunting. Khadgar felt mildly
embarrassed for his earlier thoughts.
 “Git out, half-breed,” snapped the orc. “None of your business.”
 “You’re killing my property, that makes it my business,” said Garona.
 Property?thought Khadgar, but held his tongue.
 “Prop’ty?” lisped the orc. “Who’s you to have prop’ty?”
 “I am Garona Halforcen,” snarled the woman, twisting her face into a mask of rage. “I serve Gul’dan,
warlock of the Stormreaver clan. Damage my property and you’ll have to deal with him!”
 The orc snorted again. “Stormreavers? Pah! I hear they are a weak clan, pushed around by their
warlock!”
 Garona gave him a steely glare. “What Ihear was that Bleeding Hollow failed to support the Twilight
Hollow clan in the recent attack on Stormwind, and that both clans were thrown back. Ihear that humans
beat you in a fair fight. Is that true?”
 “Dat’s beside the point,” said the Bleeding Hollow orc. “Dey had horses.”
 “Maybe I can…” said Khadgar, trying to rise to his feet.
 “Down, slave!” shouted Garona, cuffing him hard and sending him backward. “You speak when spoken
to, and not before!”
 The lead orc took the opportunity to take a step forward, but as soon as Garona had finished she
wheeled again, and a long-bladed dagger was pointed at the orc’s midsection. The other orcs backed
away from the brewing fight.
 “Do you dispute my ownership?” snarled Garona, fire in her eyes and her muscles tensed to drive the
blade through the leather armor.
 There was silence for a moment. The Bleeding Hollow orc looked at Garona, looked at the sprawled
Khadgar, and looked at Garona again. He snorted and said, “Go get something worth fighting for, first,
half-breed!”
 And with that the orc leader backed away. The others relaxed, and started to file out of the ruined
common room.
 One of his subordinates asked him as they left the building, “What duz she have a use for human slave
anyway?”
 The orc leader said something that Khadgar could not hear. The subordinate shouted from outside,
“Dat’sdisgusting!”
 Khadgar tried to stand, but Garona waved her hand for him to stay down. Despite himself, Khadgar
flinched.
 Garona moved to the empty window, watched for a moment, then returned to where Khadgar had
propped himself up against the wall.
 “I think they’re gone,” she said at last. “I was afraid they might double back to even the score. Their
leader is probably going to be challenged tonight by his subordinates.”
 Khadgar touched the tender side of his face. “I’m fine, thanks for asking.”
 Garona shook her head. “You idiot of a paleskin! If I hadn’t knocked you down, the orc leader would
have killed you outright, and then turned on me because I couldn’t keep you in line.”
 Khadgar sighed deeply. “Sorry. You’re right.”
 “You’re right I’m right,” said Garona. “They kept you alive long enough for me to get back only because
they thought you’d hidden something in the inn. That you wouldn’t be dumb enough to be out in the
middle of a war zone without equipment.”
 “Did you have to hit that hard?” asked Khadgar.
 “To convince them? Yes. Not that I didn’t enjoy it.” She threw the hares at him. “Here, skin these and
get the water boiling. There’re still pots and some tubers left in the kitchen.”
 “Despite what you’re telling your friends,” said Khadgar, “I am not your slave.”
 Garona chuckled. “Of course. But I caught breakfast. You get to cook it!”

 Breakfast was a hearty stew of rabbit and potato, seasoned with herbs Khadgar found in the remains of
the kitchen garden and mushrooms Garona picked in the wilderness. Khadgar checked the mushrooms
to see if any of them were poisonous. None of them were.
 “Orcs use their young as taste-testers,” said Garona. “If they survive, they know its good for the
community.”
 They set out on the road again, heading for Stormwind. Once more, the woods were eerily quiet, and all
they encountered was the remains of war.
 About midday, they came upon the Bleeding Hollow orcs once more. They were in a wide clear space
around a shattered watchtower, all facedown. Something large, heavy, and sharp had torn through their
back armor, and several were missing their heads.
 Garona quickly moved from body to body, pulling salvageable gear from them. Khadgar scanned the
horizon.
 Garona shouted over, “Are you going to help?”
 “In a moment,” said Khadgar. “I want to make sure that whatever killed our friends is not still around.”
 Garona scanned the edges of the clearing, then looked skyward. Nothing was overhead but low,
ink-spattered clouds.
 “Well?” she said. “I don’t hear anything.”
 “Neither did the orcs, until it was too late,” said Khadgar, joining her at the orc leader’s body. “They
were hit in the back, while running, and from an attacker taller than they were.” He pointed at hoof prints
in the dust. They were those of iron-shod, heavy horses. “Cavalry. Human cavalry.”
 Garona nodded. “So we’re getting close, at least. Take what you can from them. We can use their
rations—they’re nasty but nutritious. And take a weapon, at least a knife.”
 Khadgar looked at Garona. “I’ve been thinking.”
 Garona laughed. “I wonder how many human disasters start withthat line.”
 “We’re within range of Stormwind patrols,” said Khadgar. “I don’t think Medivh is following us, at least
not directly. So maybe we should split up.”
 “Thought of that,” said Garona, rummaging through one of the orc’s packs, and pulling out first a cloak,
and then a small cloth-wrapped parcel. She opened the parcel to find a flint and steel and a vial of oily
liquid. “Fire-starting kit,” she explained. “Orcs love fire, and this is a quick starter.”
 “So you think we should split up,” said Khadgar.
 “No,” said Garona. “I said I thought about it. The trouble is that no one is in control of this area, human
or orc. You might walk fifty yards away and hit another patrol of the Bleeding Hollow clan, and I might
get ambushed by your cavalry buddies. If the two of us are together, there’s a better chance of survival.
One is the other’s slave.”
 “Prisoner,” said Khadgar. “Humans don’t take slaves.”
 “Sure you do,” said Garona. “You just call them something else. So we should stay together.”
 “And that’s it?” said Khadgar.
 “Mostly,” said Garona. “Plus there is the little fact that I haven’t reported in to Gul’dan for some time. If
and when we do run into him, I will explain that I was held prisoner at Karazhan, and he should have
shown more wisdom than to send one of his followers into a trap.”
 “You think he’d believe that?” asked Khadgar.
 “I am uncertain that he would,” said Garona. “Which is another good reason to stay with you.”
 “You could buy yourself a lot of influence with what you’ve learned,” said Khadgar.
 Garona nodded. “Yeah. If I don’t get an ax through my brain before I get to tell anyone. No, for the
moment I’ll take my chances with the paleskins. Now, I need one more thing.”
 “What’s that?”
 “I need to gather the bodies together, and heap some brush and tinder over them. We can cache what
we don’t need, but we need to burn the bodies. It’s the least we can do.”
 Khadgar frowned. “If the heavy horse are still in the area, a plume of smoke will bring them at once.”
 “I know,” said Garona, looking around at the fragments of the patrol. “But it’s the right thing to do. If
you found human soldiers killed in an ambush, wouldn’t you want to bury them?”
 Khadgar’s mouth made a grim line, but he didn’t say anything. Instead, he went to grab the farthest orc
and drag him back to the remains of the watchtower. Within an hour, they had stripped the bodies and
set the remains ablaze.
 “Now we should go,” said Khadgar, as Garona watched the smoke spiral upward.
 “Won’t this call the horsemen?” said Garona.
 “Yes,” said Khadgar. “And it will also send a message—there are orcs here. Orcs who feel secure
enough to burn the bodies of their comrades. I’d rather have a chance to explain ourselves at close range
than facing a charging warhorse, thank you very much.”
 Garona nodded, and, stolen cloaks flapping behind them, they left the burning watchtower.

 Garona spoke truly, in that the orc version of field rations were a nasty concoction of hardened syrup,
nuts, and what Khadgar swore was boiled rat. Still, it kept them going, and they made good time.
 A day and a day passed and the country opened up now into sprawling fields that rippled with growing
crops. The land was no less desolate, though, the stables empty and the houses already collapsed in on
themselves. They found several more burned spots of orc funerals, and an increasing number of
hummocks marking the passing of human families and patrols.
 Still, they kept to the brush and fence lines as much as possible. The more open terrain made it easier to
see any other units, but left them more exposed. They holed up in a mostly intact farmhouse while a small
army of orcs moved along the ridgeline.
 Khadgar watched the line of units surge forward. Grunts, cavalry mounted on great wolves, and
catapults done up in fanciful decorations of skulls and dragons. Beside him, Garona watched the
procession and said, “Idiots.”
 Khadgar shot her a questioning glance.
 “They could not be more exposed,” she explained. “We can see them, and the paleskins can see them
as well. This lot doesn’t have an objective—they’re just rolling through the countryside, looking for a
fight. Looking for a noble death in battle.” She shook her head.
 “You don’t think much of your people,” said Khadgar.
 “I don’t think much ofany people, right now,” said Garona. “The orcs disown me, the humans will kill
me. And the only human I really trusted turned out to be a demon.”
 “Well, there’s me,” said Khadgar, trying not to sound hurt.
 Garona winced. “Yes, there is you. You are human, and I trust you. But I thought, I really thought, that
Medivh was going to make a difference. Powerful, important, and willing to talk. Unprejudiced. But I
deceived myself. He’s just another madman. Maybe that’s just my place—working for madmen. Maybe
I’m just another pawn in the game. What did Medivh call it? The unforgiving clockwork of the universe?”
 “Your role,” said Khadgar, “is whatever you choose it to be. Medivh always wanted that as well.”
 “You think he was sane when he said that?” asked the half-orc.
 Khadgar shrugged. “As sane as he ever was. I believe he was. And it sounds like you want to believe
that as well.”
 “Ayep,” drawled Garona. “It was all so simple, when I was working for Gul’dan. His little eyes and
ears. Now I don’t know who’s right and who’s wrong. Which people are my people? Either of them? At
least you don’t have to worry about divided loyalties.”
 Khadgar didn’t say anything, but looked out into the gathering dusk. Somewhere, over the horizon, the
orc army had run into something. There was the low glow of a false dawn along the edge of the world in
that direction, marked with the reflection of sudden flashes off the low clouds, and the echoes of war
drums and death sounded like distant thunder.
 Another day and a day passed. Now they moved through abandoned towns and marketplaces. The
buildings were more whole now, but still abandoned. There were signs of recent inhabitation, both by
human and orc troops, but now the only inhabitants were ghosts and memories.
 Khadgar broke into a likely-looking shop, and while its shelves had been stripped bare, the hearth still
had wood in the hopper and there were potatoes and onions in a small bin in the basement. Anything
would be an improvement after the orc’s iron rations.
 Khadgar laid the fire and Garona took a cauldron to the nearby well. Khadgar thought about the next
step. Medivh was a danger, perhaps a greater danger than the orcs. Could he be reasoned with, now?
Convinced to shut the portal? Or was it too late?
 Just the knowledge that therewas a portal would be good news. If the humans could locate it, even shut
it, it would strand the orcs on this world. Deny them reinforcements from Draenor.
 The apprentice was pulled from his thoughts by the commotion outside. The clash of metal on metal.
Human voices, bellowing.
 “Garona,” muttered Khadgar, and headed for the door.
 He found them by the well. A patrol of about ten footmen, dressed in the blue livery of Azeroth, swords
drawn. One of them was cradling a bleeding arm, but another pair had Garona in their grip, one
restraining each arm. Her long-bladed dagger was on the ground. As Khadgar rounded the corner, the
sergeant backhanded her across the face with a mailed glove.
 “Where are the others?” he snarled. The half-orc’s mouth leaked blackish-purple blood.
 “Leave her alone!” shouted Khadgar. Without thinking, he pulled the energies into his mind and released
a quick spell.
 A brilliant light blossomed around Garona’s head, a miniature sun that caught the humans unaware. The
two footmen holding Garona let go of her, and she slid to the ground. The sergeant raised a hand to
protect his eyes, and the remainder of the patrol was sufficiently surprised, so that Khadgar was among
them and at Garona’s side in a matter of moments.
 “S’prised,” muttered Garona through a split lip. “Lemme get my wind back.”
 “Stay down,” said Khadgar softly. To the blinking sergeant he barked, “Are you in charge of this
rabble?”
 By now most of the footmen had recovered, and had their swords level. The two next to Garona had
backed up a pace, but they were watching her, not Khadgar.
 The sergeant spat, “Who areyou to interfere with the military? Get him out of the way, boys!”
 “Hold!” said Khadgar, and the soldiers, having experienced his spells once, only advanced a single pace.
“I am Khadgar, apprentice to Medivh the Magus, friend and ally to your King Llane. I have business with
him. Take us at once to Stormwind.”
 The sergeant just chuckled. “Sure you are, and I am Lord Lothar. Medivh doesn’t take apprentices.
Even I know that. And who is your sweetheart, there, then?”
 “She is…” Khadgar hesitated for a moment. “She is my prisoner. I am taking her to Stormwind for
questioning.”
 “Huh,” grunted the sergeant. “Well, boyo, wefound your prisoner out here, armed, with you nowhere in
sight. I’d say your prisoner escaped. Pity the orc would rather die than surrender.”
 “Don’t touch her!” said Khadgar, and he raised his hand. Flames danced within his curled fingers.
 “You’re flirting with your own death,” snarled the sergeant. In the distance, Khadgar could hear the
heavy footfalls of horses. Reinforcements. But would they be any more willing to listen to a half-orc and a
spellcaster than this lot were?
 “You’re making a horrible mistake, sir,” said Khadgar, keeping his voice level.
 “Stay out of this, boy,” commanded the sergeant. “Take the orc. Kill her if she resists!”
 The footmen took another step forward, those closest to Garona bending down to grab her again. She
tried to squirm away and one kicked her with a heavy boot.
 Khadgar bit back tears and unleashed the spell against the sergeant. The ball of flame slammed into his
knee. The sergeant howled and dropped to the ground.
 “Now stop this,” hissed Khadgar.
 “Kill them!” shouted the sergeant, his eyes wide in pain. “Kill them both!”
 “Hold!” came another voice, darker and deeper, muffled by a great helm. The horsemen had arrived in
the town square. About twenty riders, and Khadgar’s heart sank. More here than even Garona could
take care of. Their leader was in full armor, with a visored helm. Khadgar could not see his face.
 The young apprentice rushed forward. “Sir,” he said. “Call off these men. I am the apprentice to Magus
Medivh.”
 “I know who you are,” said the commander. “Stand down!” he ordered. “Keep the orc guarded, but let
her go!”
 Khadgar gulped and continued. “I have a prisoner and important information for King Llane. I need to
see Lord Lothar, at once!”
 The commander lifted his visor. “So you shall, lad,” said Lothar. “So you shall.”
 Fifteen
 Beneath Karazhan
 The discussion at Stormwind Castle had not gone well, and now they were circling Medivh’s Tower on
gryphon-back. Beneath them, in the gathering dusk, Karazhan loomed large and empty. No lights shone
from any of its windows, and the observatory atop the structure was dark. Beneath a now-moonless sky,
even the pale stones of the tower were dark and brooding.
 There had been a heated discussion in the King’s Privy Quarters the previous evening. Khadgar and
Garona were there, although the half-orc was asked to surrender her knife to Lothar in the presence of
His Majesty. The King’s Champion was there as well, and a gaggle of advisors and courtiers all hovering
around King Llane. Khadgar could not smell a single spellcaster in the group, and surmised that any that
had survived Medivh’s poaching were either on the battlefield or squirreled away for safekeeping.
 As for the King himself, the young man from the early visions had grown up. He had the broad shoulders
and sharp features of his youth, only now starting to surrender to middle age. Of all present, he was
resplendent, and his blue robes shone among the others. He kept an open-faced helm to one side of his
seat, a great helm with white wings, as if he expected to be called onto the battlefield at any moment.
 Khadgar wondered if such a call was not exactly what Llane desired, remembering the headstrong youth
of the troll-vision. A direct conflict on an open and level field, with his forces’ eventual triumph never in
doubt. He wondered how much of the assuredness derived from the faith in the Magus’s eventual
support. Indeed, it seemed that one led naturally to the other—that the Magus will always support
Stormwind, and Stormwind will always hold as a result of the Magus’s support.
 The healers had tended to Garona’s split lip, but could do nothing for her temper. Several times
Khadgar winced as she bluntly described the orcish opinions of the master mage’s sanity, of the paleskins
in general, and Llane’s troops in particular.
 “The orcs are relentless,” she said. “And they will not let up. They will be back.”
 “They did not get within bowshot of the walls,” countered Llane. To Khadgar, his majesty seemed more
amused than alarmed by Garona’s direct manner and blunt warnings.
 “They did not get within bowshot of the walls,” repeated Garona. “This time. Next time they will. And
the time after that they will get over the walls. I don’t think you are taking the orcs sufficiently seriously,
sire.”
 “I assure you, I take this very seriously,” said Llane. “But I am also aware of the strengths of Stormwind.
Of its walls, of its armies, of its allies, and of its heart. Perhaps if you saw them, you too would be less
confident in the power of the orcs.”
 Llane was similarly adamant about the Magus as well. Khadgar laid everything out before the privy
council, with assurances and additions from Garona. The visions of the past, the erratic behavior, the
visions that were not visions at all but rather true demonstrations of Sargeras’s presence in Karazhan. Of
Medivh’s culpability in the present assault on Azeroth.
 “If I had a silver groat for every man who has told me that Medivh is mad, I would be richer than I am
today,” said Llane. “He has a plan, young sir. It’s as simple as that. More times than I can count he has
gone off on some mad dash or another, and Lothar here had worried his beard to tatters. And each time
he’s proved to be right. The last time he was here did he not hare off to hunt a demon, and bring it back
within a few hours? Hardly the action of one demon-possessed to decapitate one of his own.”
 “But it might be the action of one who was trying to maintain his own innocence,” put in Garona. “No
one saw him kill this demon, in the heart of your city. Could he not have summoned it up, then killed and
provided it as the one responsible?”
 “Supposition,” grumbled the king. “No. With respect to both of you, I do not deny that you saw what
you saw. Not even these ‘visions’ of the past. But I think the Magus is crazy like a fox, and all this is part
of some larger plan of his. He always speaks of larger plans and greater cycles.”
 “With all due respect,” said Khadgar. “The Magus may have a larger plan, but the question is, does
Stormwind and Azeroth truly have a place within that plan?”
 So went most of the evening. King Llane was adamant on all points—that Azeroth could, with their
allies, destroy or drive back the orc hordes to its home world, that Medivh was working on some plan
that no one else could understand, and that Stormwind could withstand any assault “as long as men with
stout hearts were manning the walls and the throne.”
 Lothar for his part was mostly silent, only breaking in to ask a relevant question, then shaking his head
when Khadgar or Garona gave him a truthful answer. Finally, he spoke up.
 “Llane, don’t let your security blind you!” he said. “If we cannot count on Magus Medivh as an ally, we
are weakened. If we discount the capabilities of the orcs, we are lost. Listen to what they are saying!”
 “I am listening,” said the King. “But I hear not only with my head but with my heart. We spent many
years with young Medivh, both before and during his long sleep. He remembers his friends. And once he
reveals his thinking, I’m sure even you will appreciate what a friend we have in the Magus.”
 At last the King rose and dismissed all, promising to take the matters under proper consideration.
Garona was muttering under her breath, and Lothar gave them rooms without windows and with guards
on the doors, just to be sure.
 Khadgar tried to sleep, but the frustration kept him pacing the floor for most of the night. Finally, when
exhaustion had finally claimed him, there was a sound pounding on the door.
 It was Lothar, in full armor, with a uniform draped over his arm. “Sleep like the dead, will you?” he said,
holding out the livery with a smile. “Put this on and meet us at the top of the tower in fifteen minutes. And
hurry, lad.”
 Khadgar struggled into the gear, which included trousers, heavy boots, blue livery marked with the lion
of Azeroth, and heavy-bladed sword. He thought twice about the sword, but slung it onto his back. It
might prove useful.
 There were no less than six gryphons clustered on the towers, rustling their great wings in agitation.
Lothar was there, and Garona as well. She was similarly dressed to Khadgar, with the blue tabard
marked with the lion of Azeroth, and a heavy sword.
 “Don’t,” she growled at him, “say a word.”
 “You look very good in it,” he said. “It goes with your eyes.”
 Garona snorted. “Lothar said the same thing. He tried to convince me by saying that you were wearing
the outfit, too.And that he wanted to make sure that none of the others shot me thinking I was someone
else.”
 “Others?” said Khadgar, and looked around. In the morning light, it was clear that there were other
flights of gryphons on other towers. Around six, including theirs, the gryphons’ wings pink with the
unrisen sun. He was unaware that there were this many trained gryphons in the world, much less
Stormwind. Lothar must have gone to talk to the dwarves. The air was cold and sharp as a dagger thrust.
 Lothar hurried up to them, and adjusted Khadgar’s sword so he could ride gryphon-back with it.
 “His Majesty,” grumbled Lothar, “has an abiding faith in the strength of the people of Azeroth and the
thickness of the walls of Stormwind. It doesn’t hurt that he also has good people who take care of things
when he’s wrong.”
 “Like us,” said Khadgar, grimly.
 “Like us,” repeated Lothar. He looked at Khadgar hard and added, “I had asked you how he was, you
know.”
 “Yes,” said Khadgar. “And I told you the truth, or as much of it as I understood it at the time. And I felt
loyal to him.”
 “I understand,” said Lothar. “And I feel loyal to him as well. I want to make sure what you say is true.
But I also want you to be able to do what needs to be done, if we have to do it.”
 Khadgar nodded. “You believe me, don’t you?”
 Lothar nodded grimly. “Long ago, when I was your age, I was tending to Medivh. He was in his coma,
then, that long sleep that denied him much of his youth. I thought it was a dream, but I swore there was
another man opposite me, also watching over the Magus. He seemed to be made of burnished brass, and
he had heavy horns on his brow, and his beard made of flames.”
 “Sargeras,” said Khadgar.
 Lothar let out a deep breath. “I thought I had fallen asleep, that it was a dream, that it could not be what
I thought it was. You see, I too felt loyal to him. But I never forgot what I saw. And as the years passed I
began to realize that I had seen a bit of the truth, and that it may come to this. We may yet save Medivh,
but we might find that the darkness is too deeply rooted. Then we will have to do something sudden,
horrible, and absolutely necessary. The question is—Are you up to it?”
 Khadgar thought for a moment, then nodded. His stomach felt like ice. Lothar raised a hand. On his
command, the other flights of gryphons strained aloft, springing to life as the first rays of the dawn crested
the earth’s rim, the new sunlight catching their wings and turning them golden.
 The chill feeling in the pit of Khadgar’s stomach did not ebb on the long flight to Karazhan. Garona rode
behind him, but neither spoke as the land fled beneath their wings.
 The land had changed beneath their wings. Great fields were little more than blackened wreckage,
dotted by the remnants of toppled foundations. Forests were uprooted to feed the engines of war,
creating huge scars in the landscape. Open pits yawned wide, the earth itself wounded and stripped to
reach the metals beneath. Columns of smoke rose up along the horizon, though whether they were from
battlefields or forges Khadgar could not say. They flew through the day and the sun was ebbing along the
horizon now.
 Karazhan rose like an ebon shadow at the center of its crater, sucking in the last dying rays of the day
and giving nothing back. No lights shone from the tower nor from any of the hollow windows. The
torches that flamed without consuming their source had been extinguished. Khadgar wondered if Medivh
had fled.
 Lothar kneed his gryphon down, and Khadgar followed, quickly setting down, and slipping from the
back of the winged beast. As soon as he touched the ground, the gryphon shot aloft again, letting out a
shrieking cry and heading north.
 The Champion of Azeroth was already at the stairs, his huge shoulders tensed, his heavy frame moving
with the quiet, agile grace of a cat, his blade drawn. Garona slunk forward as well, her hand dipping into
her tabbard and coming up with her long-bladed dagger. The heavy blade from Stormwind clattered
against Khadgar’s hip, and he felt like a clumsy creature of stone compared to the other two. Behind him,
more gryphons landed and discharged their warriors.
 The observatory parapet was empty, and the upper level of the master mage’s study deserted but not
empty. There were still tools scattered about, and the smashed remnants of the golden device, an
astrolabe, rested on the mantel. So if the tower was truly abandoned, it was done quickly.
 Or it had not been abandoned at all.
 Torches were fired and the party descended the myriad stairs, with Lothar, Garona, and Khadgar in the
lead. Once these walls were familiar, were home, the many stairs a daily challenge. Now, the
wall-mounted torches, with their cool, frozen flame, had been extinguished, and the moving torches of the
invaders cast myriad armed shadows against the wall, giving the halls an alien, almost nightmarish cast.
The very walls seemed to hold menace, and Khadgar expected every darkened doorway to hold a
deadly ambush.
 There was nothing. The galleries were empty, the banquet halls bare, the meeting rooms as devoid of life
and furnishings as ever. The guest quarters were still furnished, but unoccupied. Khadgar checked his
own quarters: Nothing had changed there.
 Now the torchlight cast strange shadows on the walls of the library, twisting the iron frames and turning
the bookcases into battlements. The books were untouched, and even Khadgar’s most recent notes
were still on the table. Had Medivh not thought enough of the library to take any of his volumes?
 Tatters of paper caught Khadgar’s eye, and he crossed to the shelves containing the epic poetry. This
was new. Fragments of a scroll, now smashed and torn. Khadgar picked up a large piece, read a few
words, then nodded.
 “What is it?” said Lothar, looking like he expected the books to come to life at any moment and attack.
 “‘The Song of Aegwynn,’” said Khadgar. “An epic poem about his mother.”
 Lothar grunted a note of understanding, but Khadgar wondered. Medivh had been here, after they had
left. Yet only to destroy the scroll? Out of harsh memories of the Magus’s conflict with his mother? Out
of revenge for Sargeras’s decisive loss to Aegwynn? Or did the act of destroying the scroll, the cipher
used by the Guardians of Tirisfal, symbolize his resignation and final betrayal of the group?
 Khadgar risked a simple spell—one used to divine magical presences—but came up with nothing more
than the normal response when surrounded by magical tomes. If Medivh had cast a spell here, he had
masked its presence sufficiently to beat anything Khadgar could manage.
 Lothar noted the young mage tracing symbols into the air, and when he was done, said, “You’d best
save your strength for when we find him.”
 Khadgar shook his head and wondered if they were going to find the Magus.
 They found Moroes, instead, at the lowest level, near the entrance to the kitchen and larder. His
crumpled form was splayed in the middle of the hallway, a bloody rainbow arcing along the floor to one
side. His eyes were wide and open, but his face was surprisingly composed. Not even death seemed to
surprise the castellan.
 Garona dodged into the kitchen, and returned a moment later. Her face was a paler shade of green, and
she held something up for Khadgar to see.
 A set of rose-colored lenses, smashed. Cook. Khadgar nodded.
 The bodies seemed to make the troops more alert now, and they moved to the great vault-like
entranceway, and out into the courtyard itself. There had been no sign of Medivh, and only a few broken
clues of his passing.
 “Could he have another lair?” Lothar asked. “Another place he would hide?”
 “He was often gone,” said Khadgar. “Sometimes gone for days, then reappearing without warning.”
Something moved along the balcony overlooking the main entrance—just a slight wavering of the air.
Khadgar started and stared at the location, but it looked normal.
 “Perhaps he went to the orcs, to lead them,” suggested the Champion.
 Garona shook her head. “They would never accept a human leader.”
 “He couldn’t vanish into thin air!” thundered Lothar. To the troops he shouted, “Form up! We’re going
to head back!”
 Garona ignored the Champion, then said, “He didn’t. Back into the tower.” She parted the troops like a
boat cutting through a choppy sea.
 She disappeared once more in the open maw of the tower. Lothar looked at Khadgar, who shrugged
and followed the half-orc.
 Moroes had not moved, his blood smeared across the floor in a quarter circle, away from the wall.
Garona touched that wall, as if trying to feel something along it. She frowned, cursed, and slapped the
wall, which gave a very solid response.
 “It should be here,” she said.
 “What should be?” asked Khadgar.
 “A door,” said the half-orc.
 “There’s never been a door here,” said Khadgar.
 “There’salways been a door, probably,” said Garona. “You’ve just never seen it. Look. Moroes died
here,” she stomped her foot next to the wall, “And then his body was moved, creating the smear of blood
in the quarter-circle, to where we found it.”
 Lothar grunted assent, and started to run his hands along the wall as well.
 Khadgar looked at the apparently blank wall. He had passed it five or six times a day. There should be
nothing but earth and stone on the far side. Still…
 “Stand away,” the young mage said. “Let me try something.”
 The Champion and half-orc stood back, and Khadgar pulled the energies together for a spell. He has
used it before, on real doors and locked books, but this was the first time he tried to work it on a door
he could not see. He tried to envision the door, figuring how large it would have to be to move Moroes’s
body in the quarter circle, where the hinges would be, where the frame would be, and, if he wanted to
keep it secure, where he would place the locks.
 He envisioned the door, and flung a bit of magic into its unseen frame to unfasten those hidden locks.
Half to his surprise, the wall shifted, and a seam appeared along one side. Not a lot, but enough to define
the clear edges of a door that had not been there a moment before.
 “Use your swords and pry it open,” snarled Lothar, and the squad surged forward. The stone door
resisted their attempts for a few moments, until some mechanism within it snapped loudly and the door
swung outward, nuzzling Moroes’s corpse as it did so, and revealed a stairway descending into the
depths.
 “He didn’t vanish into thin air,” said Garona grimly. “He stayed here, but went someplace no one else
knew about.”
 Khadgar looked at Moroes’s crumpled form. “Almost no one. But I wonder what else he has hidden.”
 They moved down the stairs, and a sense grew within Khadgar. While the upper levels felt spookily
abandoned, the depths beneath the tower had a palpable aura of immediate menace and foreboding. The
rough-hewn walls and floor were moist, and in the light of the torches seemed to undulate like living flesh.
 It took a moment for Khadgar to realize that as the stairs continued to spiral down, they now had
reversed their direction, moving opposite to the tower above, as if this descent was a mirror of that
above.
 Indeed, where an empty meeting room would be within the tower, here was a dungeon bedecked with
unoccupied iron chains. Where a banquet hall stood unused above the surface was a room strewn with
detritus and marked with mystic circles. The air felt heavy and oppressive here, as it had in the tower in
Stormwind, where Huglar and Hugarin had been slain. Here was where the demon that attacked them
had been summoned.
 When they reached the level that mirrored the library, they found a set of iron-shod doors. The stairs
continued to spiral down into the earth, but the company was brought up short here, regarding the mystic
symbols carved deeply into the wood and dabbed with brownish blood. It seemed as if the wood itself
was bleeding. Two huge rings of iron hung from the wounded doors.
 “This would be the library,” said Khadgar.
 Lothar nodded. He had noted the similarities between the tower and this burrow as well. “See what he
keeps here, if the books are all upstairs.”
 Garona said, “His study is at the top of the tower, with his observatory, so if heis here, he should be at
the very bottom. We should press on.”
 But she was too late. As Khadgar touched the iron-shod doors, a spark leapt from his palm to the door,
a signal, a magical trap. Khadgar had time to curse as the doors were flung open, back into the darkness
of the library.
 A kennel. Sargeras had no need for knowledge, so he turned the room over to his pets. The creatures
lived within a darkness of their own making, and acrid smoke wafted out into the hallway.
 There were eyes within. Eyes and flaming maws and bodies made of fire and shadow. They stalked
forward, snarling.
 Khadgar sketched runes in the air, pulling the energy together in his mind, to pull the doors closed again,
as soldiers struggled with the great rings shut again. Neither spellcraft nor muscle could move the rings.
 The beasts let out a harsh, choppy laugh, and crouched to spring.
 Khadgar raised his hands to cast another spell, but Lothar batted them down.
 “This is to waste your time and energy,” he said. “It is to delay us. Head down and find Medivh.”
 “But they are…” started Khadgar, and the large demon-beast in the front leapt at them.
 Lothar took two steps forward and brought up his blade to meet the leaping beast. As he pulled his
blade upward, the runes etched deep into the metal blazed with a bright yellow light. For a half-second,
Khadgar saw fear in the eyes of the demon-beast.
 And then the arc of Lothar’s cut intersected with the demon-beast’s leap and the blade bit deep into the
creature’s flesh. Lothar’s blade erupted from the creature’s back, and he neatly bisected the forward
portion of its torso in two. The beast had only a moment to squeal in pain as the blade pulled forward
through its skull, completing the arch. The smoldering wreckage of the demon-beast, weeping fire and
bleeding shadow, fell at Lothar’s feet.
 “Go!” thundered the Champion. “We’ll take care of this and catch up.”
 Garona grabbed Khadgar, and pulled him down the stairs. Behind them, the soldiers had pulled their
blades, as well, and the runes danced in brilliant flames as they drank deep of the shadows. The young
mage and half-orc rounded the curve of the stairs, and behind them they heard the cries of the dying,
from both human and inhuman throats.
 They spiraled into the darkness, Garona holding a torch in one hand, dagger in the other. Now Khadgar
noticed that the walls glowed with their own faint phosphorescence, a reddish hue like some nocturnal
mushrooms deep within the forest. It was also growing warmer, and the sweat was beading along his
forehead.
 As they came to one of the dining halls, suddenly Khadgar’s stomach wrenched and they were
somewhere else. It moved suddenly upon them, like a leading edge of a summer storm.
 They were atop one of the larger towers of Stormwind, and around them the city was in flames. Pillars
of smoke rose from all sides, spreading into a black blanket above that snared the sun. A similar blanket
of blackness surrounded the city walls, but this was made of orcish troops. From their viewpoint
Khadgar and Garona could see the armies spread out like beetles on the verdant corpse that had been
Stormwind’s cropland. Now there were only siege towers and armed grunts, the colors of their banners
a sickening rainbow.
 The forests were gone as well, transformed into catapults that now rained fire down on the city itself.
Most of the lower city was in flames, and as Khadgar watched, a section of the outer walls collapsed,
and small dolls dressed in green and blue fought each other among the rubble.
 “How did we get…?” started Garona.
 “Vision,” said Khadgar bluntly, but he wondered if this was a random occurrence of the tower, or
another delaying action by the Magus.
 “I told the King. I told him, but he would not listen,” she muttered. To Khadgar she said, “This is a vision
of the future, then? How do we get out of the vision?”
 The young mage shook his head. “We don’t, at least for the moment. In the past these would come and
go. Sometimes a good shock will break it.”
 A flaming piece of debris, a fiery missile from a catapult, passed within bowshot of the tower. Khadgar
could feel the heat as it fell to earth.
 Garona looked around. “At least it’s just orc armies,” she said grimly.
 “That’s good news?” said Khadgar, his eyes stinging as a column of smoke wafted over the tower.
 “No demons in the orc armies,” noted the half-orc. “If Medivh was with them, we would see much
worse as well. Maybe we convinced him to help.”
 “I’m not seeing Medivh among our troops, either,” said Khadgar, forgetting who he was speaking to for
the moment. “Is he dead? Did he flee?”
 “How far in the future are we?” asked Garona.
 Behind them, there was a rise of voices in argument. The pair turned away from the parapet and saw
that they were outside one of the royal audience halls, now converted into a coordination center against
the assault. A small model of the city had been laid out on the table, and toy soldiers in the shapes of men
and orcs were scattered around it. There was a constant flow of reports coming in as King Llane and his
advisors hunched over the table.
 “Breech along the Merchant’s District Wall!”
 “More fires in the lower city!”
 “Large forces massing at the main gates again. It looks like spellcasters!”
 Khadgar noted that none of the earlier courtiers were now present, replaced with grim-faced men in
uniforms similar to their own. No sign of Lothar at the table, and Khadgar hoped he was on the front
lines, carrying the battle to the foe.
 Llane moved with a deft hand, as if his city was attacked on a regular basis. “Bring up the Fourth and
Fifth Company to reinforce the breech. Get the militia to organize bucket brigades—take the water from
the public baths. And bring up two squads of lancers to the main gate. When the orcs are about to
attack, then launch a sortie against them. That will break the assault. Bring two mages over from the
Goldsmith’s street; are they done there?”
 “That assault has been turned,” came the report. “The mages are exhausted.”
 Llane nodded and said, “Have them stand down, then, pull back for an hour. Bring the younger mages
from the academy instead. Send twice as many, but tell them to be careful. Commander Borton, I want
your forces on the East wall. That’s where I would hit next, if I were them.”
 To each commander in turn, Llane gave an assignment. There was no argument, no discussion, no
suggestions. Each warrior in turn nodded and left. In the end, all that was left was King Llane and his
small model of a city that was now in flames outside his window.
 The king leaned forward, resting his knuckles on the table. His face looked worn and old. He looked up
and said to the empty air, “You can make your report now.”
 The curtains opposite hissed against the floor as Garona stepped out. The half-orc at Khadgar’s side let
out a gasp in surprise.
 The future Garona was dressed in her customary black pants and black silk blouse, but wore a cloak
marked with the lion’s head of Azeroth. She had a wild look in her eyes. The present Garona gripped
Khadgar’s arm, and he could feel her nails dig into his arm.
 “Bad news, sire,” said Garona, approaching the King’s side of the table. “The various clans are working
together in this assault, unified under the Blackhand the Destroyer. None of them will betray the others
until after Stormwind has fallen. Gul’dan is bringing up his warlocks by nightfall. Until then, the Blackrock
clan will be trying to take the Eastern Wall.” Khadgar heard a tremor in the half-orc’s voice.
 Llane let out a deep sigh, and said, “Expected and countered. We will throw this one back, just like the
others. And we will hold until the reinforcements come. As long as men with stout hearts are manning the
walls and the throne, Stormwind will hold.”
 The future-Garona nodded, and Khadgar now saw that large tears were pooling in the corners of her
eyes. “The orc leaders agree with your assessment,” she said, and her hand dipped into her black blouse.
 Both Khadgar and the real Garona shouted as one as the future-Garona pulled her long-bladed dagger
and shoved it upward beneath the King’s left breast. She moved with a quickness and grace and left
King Llane with nothing more than a puzzled expression on his face. His eyes were wide, and for a
moment he hung there, suspended on her blade.
 “The orc leaders agree with your assessment,” she said again, and tears were running freely down the
sides of her wide face. “And have enlisted an assassin to remove that strong heart on the throne.
Someone you would let come close. Someone you would meet with alone.”
 Llane, King of Azeroth, Master of Stormwind, ally of wizard and warrior, slid to the floor.
 “I’m sorry,” said Garona.
 “No!”shouted Garona, the present Garona, as she slipped to the floor herself. Suddenly they were back
in the false dining hall. The wreckage of Stormwind was gone and the corpse of the king with it. The
half-orc’s tears remained, now in the eyes of the real Garona.
 “I’m going to kill him,” she said in a small voice. “I’m going to kill him. He treated me well, and listened
when I talked, and I’m going to kill him. No.”
 Khadgar knelt down besides her. “It’s okay. It may not be true. It may not happen. It’s a vision.”
 “Its true,” she said. “I saw it and I knew that it was true.”
 Khadgar was silent for a moment, reliving his own vision of the future, beneath a red-hued sky, battling
Garona’s people. He saw it and knew it was true as well. “We have to go,” he said, but Garona just
shook her head. “After all this, I thought I found someplace better than the orcs. But now I know, I’m
going to destroy it all.”
 Khadgar looked up and down the stairs. No idea how Lothar’s men were doing with the demons, no
idea what lay at the base of the underground tower. His face formed a grim line, and he took a deep
breath.
 And slapped Garona hard across the face.
 His own palm bled from striking a tusk, but the response on Garona was immediate. Her teary eyes
widened and a mask of rage hardened on her expression.
 “You idiot!” she shouted, and leapt on Khadgar bearing him over backward. “You never do that! You
hear me! Do that again and I’ll kill you!”
 Khadgar was sprawled on his back, the half-orc on top of him. He didn’t even see her draw the dagger,
but now its blade was resting against the side of his neck.
 “You can’t,” he managed with a harsh smile. “I had a vision of my own future. I think its true as well. If it
is, then you can’t kill me now. Same thing applies to you.”
 Garona blinked and rocked back on her haunches, suddenly in control again. “So if I am going to kill the
King…”
 “You’re going to get out of here alive,” said Khadgar. “So am I.”
 “But what if we’re wrong,” said Garona. “What if the vision is false?”
 Khadgar pulled himself to his feet. “Then you die knowing that you’ll never kill the King of Azeroth.”
 Garona sat for a moment, her mind working over the possibilities. At length she said, “Give me a hand
up. We have to move on.”
 They continued to spiral downward, through false analogs of the tower levels above. Finally they
reached the level that would be the uppermost level, of Medivh’s observatory and lair. Instead the stairs
spilled out on a reddish plain. It seemed to be poured out of cooling obsidian, dark, reflective puzzle
pieces floating on fire beneath their feet. Khadgar instinctively jumped back, but the footing seemed solid
and the heat, while sweltering, was not oppressive.
 In the center of the great cave was a simple collection of iron furniture. A work bench and stool, a few
chairs, a gathering of cabinets. For a moment it looked oddly familiar, then Khadgar realized that it was
set up in an exact duplicate to Medivh’s tower room.
 Standing among the iron furniture was the broad-shouldered form of the Magus. Khadgar strained to see
something in his manner, in his bearing, that would betray him, that would reveal this figure to not be the
Medivh he had come to know and trust, the older man who had shown his faith and encouraged his
work. Something that would declare this to be an imposter.
 There was nothing. This was the only Medivh he had ever known.
 “Hello, Young Trust,” said the Magus and flames ignited along his beard as he smiled. “Hello, Emissary.
I’ve been expecting you both.”
 Sixteen
 The Breaking of a Mage
 It was inspired, I must say,” said the Medivh who was and was not Medivh. “Inspired to summon the
shadow of my past, a piece that would stop me from pursuing you. Of course, while you were out
gathering your strength, I was out gathering my own.”
 Khadgar looked at Garona and nodded. The half-orc moved a few steps to the right. They would
surround the old man if they had to.
 “Master, what happened to you?” said Khadgar, taking a step forward, trying to focus the Magus’s
attention on him.
 The older mage laughed. “Happened to me? Nothing happened to me. This is who I am. I was tainted
from birth, polluted from before my conception, a bad seed grown to bear bitter fruit. You have never
seen the true Medivh.”
 “Magus, whatever has happened, I’m sure it can be fixed,” said Khadgar, walking slowly toward him.
Garona orbited out to the right, and her long-bladed dagger had vanished again—her hands were
apparently empty.
 “Why should I fix it?” said Medivh with an evil smile. “All goes as planned. The orcs will slay the humans
and I will control them through warlock-chiefs like Gul’dan. I will lead these misshapened creations to the
lost tomb where Sargeras’s body is, protected against demon and human but not against orc, and my
form will be free. And then I can shed this lumpish body and weakened spirit and burn this world as it so
richly deserves.”
 Khadgar stepped to the left as he spoke. “You are Sargeras.”
 “Yes and no,” said the Magus. “I am, for when Aegwynn killed my physical body I hid within her womb,
and invested her very cells with my dark essence. When she finally chose to mate with a human mage, I
was already there. Medivh’s dark twin, completly subsumed within his form.”
 “Monstrous,” said Khadgar.
 Medivh grinned. “Little different than what Aegwynn had planned, for she placed the power of the
Tirisfalen within the child as well. Small wonder that there was so little room for the young Medivh
himself, with the demon and the light both fighting over his very soul. So when the power truly manifested
within him, I shut him down for a while, until I could put my own plans into operation.”
 Khadgar continued to move left, trying not to watch as Garona crept up behind the older mage. Instead
he said, “Is there anything of the real Medivh within you?”
 “Some,” said Medivh. “Enough to deal with you lesser creatures. Enough to fool the kings and wizards
as to my intent. Medivh is a mask—I have left enough of him at the surface to display to others. And if in
my workings I seem odd or even mad, they write it off to my position and responsibility, and to the
power invested in me by my dear mother.”
 Medivh gave a predatory grin. “I was crafted first by Magna Aegwynn’s politics to be her tool, and then
shaped by demonic hands to be their tool. Even the Order saw me as little more than a weapon to be
used against demons. And so it not surprising at all that I am nothing more that the sum of my parts.”
 Garona was behind the mage now, blade drawn, moving on the softest of steps on the obsidian floor.
There were no tears in her eyes, but rather a steely determination. Khadgar kept himself focused on
Medivh, not wanting to betray her with a single glance.
 “You see,” continued the mad mage, “I am nothing but one more component in the great machine, one
that has been running since the Well of Eternity was first shattered. The one thing that the original bits of
Medivh and myself agree on is that this cycle needs to be shattered. Of this, I assure you, we are of one
mind.”
 Garona was within a step now, her dagger raised. She took the last step.
 “Excuse me,” said Medivh, and lashed out with a fist. Mystic energies danced along the older man’s
knuckles, and he caught the half-orc square in the face. She staggered backward under the blow.
 Khadgar let loose a curse and raised his hands to cast a spell. Something to knock the mage off his
balance. Something simple. Something quick.
 Medivh was quicker, turning back to him and raising a claw-like hand. Immediately, Khadgar felt the air
around him tighten into a restraining cloak, trapping his arms and legs and making it impossible for him to
move. He shouted but his voice sounded muffled and coming from a great distance.
 Medivh raised his other hand, and pain shot through Khadgar’s body. The joints of his skeleton seemed
to seethe with red-hot spikes that subsided quickly into dull, throbbing pains. His chest tightened, and his
flesh felt like it dried out and crawled along his frame. He felt like the fluids were being pulled from his
body, leaving a shriveled husk behind. And with it he felt his magic pulled away as well, his body drained
of his ability to cast spells, to summon the requisite energies. He felt like a vessel being emptied.
 As suddenly as the attack descended upon him, it had passed, and Khadgar toppled to the floor, the
wind knocked out of him. It hurt his chest to breath.
 Garona had recovered at this point, and came in screaming this time, bringing her dagger-hand upward,
to catch Medivh beneath the left breast. Instead of trying to back up, Medivh stepped toward the
charging half-orc, inside the arc of her blow. He raised a hand and caught her forehead in his hand. She
froze in midcharge.
 Mystic energy of a sickening yellow hue pulsed beneath his hand and the half-orc hung there, her body
twitching helplessly, as the mage held her by the forehead.
 “Poor, poor Garona,” said Medivh. “I thought with your conflicting heritages, you of all people would
understand what I’m going through. That you would understand the importance of making your own way.
But you’re just like the others, aren’t you?”
 The wide-eyed half-orc could only manage a spittle-drenched gurgle in response.
 “Let me show you my world, Garona,” said Medivh. “Let me drive my own divisions and doubts into
you. You’ll never know who you serve and why. You’ll never find your peace.”
 Garona tried to scream, but it died in her throat as her face was bathed in a radiant sunburst issued from
Medivh’s palm.
 Medivh laughed and let the half-orc collapse to the floor, sobbing. She tried to rise, but slumped again.
Her eyes were wide and wild, and her breath was short and ragged, torn by tears.
 Khadgar could breathe now, but the breath was short and tight. His joints burned, and his muscles
ached. He saw his reflection in the obsidian floor….
 And it was the old man of the vision looking back at him. Heavy, tired eyes surrounded by wrinkles and
gray hair. Even his beard had turned white.
 And Khadgar’s heart sank. Robbed of his youth, of his magic, he no longer felt like he would survive this
battle.
 “That was instructive,” said Medivh, turning back to Khadgar. “One of the negative things about this
humaniform cell I am trapped in is that the human part keeps reaching out. Making friends. Helping
people. It makes it so difficult to destroy them later on. I almost wept when I killed Moroes and Cook,
did you know? That’s why I had to come down here. But it’s like anything else. Once you get used to it,
you can kill friends as easily as anyone else.”
 Now he stood a few paces in front of Khadgar, his shoulders straight, his eyes vibrant. Looking more
like Medivh than at any time Khadgar had seen him. Looking confident. Looking at ease. Looking
frighteningly, damnedly sane.
 “And now you get to die, Young Trust,” said the Magus. “It seems your trust was misplaced after all.”
Medivh raised a hand cupped with magical energy.
 There was a throaty scream from the right. “Medivh!” bellowed Lothar, Champion of Azeroth.
 Medivh looked up, and his face seemed to soften for a moment, though his hand still burned with the
mystic power. “Anduin Lothar?” he said. “Old friend, why are you here?”
 “Stop it now, Med,” said Lothar, and Khadgar could hear the pain the Champion’s voice. “Stop it
before it is too late. I don’t want to fight you.”
 “I don’t want to fight you either, old friend,” said Medivh raising his hand. “You have no idea what it’s
like to do the things I’ve done. Harsh things. Necessary things. I don’t want to fight you. So lay down
your weapon, friend, and let this be done.”
 Medivh opened his palm and the bits of magic droned toward the Champion, bathing him in stars.
 “You want to help me, don’t you, old friend,” said Medivh, the harsh smile once more on his face. “You
want to be my servant. Come help me dispose of this child. Then we can be friends again.”
 The spangling stars around Lothar faded, and the Champion took a slow, firm step forward, then
another, then a third, and now Lothar charged forward. As he charged, the Champion raised his
rune-carved blade high. He charged at Medivh, not at Khadgar. A curse rose in his voice, a curse
backed by sorrow and tears.
 Medivh was surprised, but just for a moment. He dodged backward and Lothar’s first cut passed
harmlessly through the space the Magus had occupied a half-second before. The Champion checked the
swing and brought it back in a solid blocking motion, driving the mage another step back. Then an
overhand chop, driving back another step.
 Now Medivh had recovered himself, and the next blow landed squarely on a shield of bluish energy, the
yellow fires of the sword spattering harmlessly like sparks. Lothar tried to cut upward, then thrust, then
chop again. Each attack was met and countered by the shield.
 Medivh snarled and raised a clawed hand, mystic energy dancing in his palm. Lothar screamed as his
clothes suddenly burst into flames. Medivh smiled at his handiwork, then waved his hand, tossing the
burning form of Lothar aside like a rag doll.
 “Just. Gets. Easier,” said Medivh, biting off the words and turning back to where Khadgar had been
kneeling.
 Except Khadgar had moved. Medivh turned to find the no-longer young mage right behind him, with the
sword Lothar had provided drawn and pressed against the Magus’s left breast. The runes along the
blade glowed like miniature suns.
 “Don’t even blink,” said Khadgar.
 A moment paused, and a bead of sweat trickled down Medivh’s cheek.
 “So it comes to this,” said the Magus. “I don’t think you have the skill or the will to use that properly,
Young Trust.”
 “I think,” said Khadgar, and it seemed that his voice wheezed and burbled as he spoke, “that the human
part of you, Medivh, kept others around despite your own plans. As a backup. As a plan for when you
finally went mad. So your friends could put you down. So we could break the cycle where you cannot.”
 Medivh managed a small sigh, and his features softened. “I never meant to really harm anyone,” he said.
“I only wanted to have my own life.” As he spoke, he jerked his hand upward, his palm glowing with
mystic energy, seeking to scramble Khadgar’s mind as he had Garona’s.
 Medivh never got the chance. At the first flinch, Khadgar lunged forward, driving the thin blade of the
runesword between Medivh’s ribs, into the heart.
 Medivh looked surprised, even shocked, but his mouth still moved. He was trying to say something.
 Khadgar drove the blade home to the hilt, the tip erupting from the back of the mage’s robes. The mage
sunk to his knees, and Khadgar dropped with him as well, keeping his hands firmly locked on the blade.
The old mage gasped and struggled to say something.
 “Thank you,” he managed at last. “I fought it for as long as I could….”
 Then the master mage’s face began to transform, the beard turning fully to flame, the horns sprouting
from his brow. With the death of Medivh, Sargeras finally came fully to the surface. Khadgar felt the hilt
of the runeblade grow warm, as the fires danced along Medivh’s flesh, transforming him to a thing of
shadow and flame.
 Behind the kneeling, wounded Magus, Khadgar could see the smoldering form of Lothar rise once
more. The Champion stumbled forward, his flesh and armor still smoking. He raised his runeblade once
more, and brought it across in a hard, level swing.
 The edge of the blade burst like a sun as it struck Medivh’s neck, and severed the master mage’s head
from the neck in one smooth blow.
 It was like unstoppering a bottle, for everything within Medivh rushed out at once through ragged
remnants of his neck. A great torrent of energy and light, shadow and fire, smoke and rage, all spilling
upward like a fountain, splashing against the ceiling of the underground vault, and dissipating away.
Within the seething caldron of energies, Khadgar thought he could make out a horned face, crying in
despair and rage.
 And when it was over, all that was left was the skin and clothes of the Magus. All that was within him
had been eaten away, and now that his human form had been ripped asunder, there was no way to
contain it.
 Lothar used the tip of his sword to stir aside the rags and flesh that had been Medivh and said, “We
need to go.”
 Khadgar looked around. There was no sign of Garona. The Magus’s head had boiled away all the flesh,
leaving only a glistening red-white skull.
 The former apprentice shook his head. “I need to stay here. Attend to a few things.”
 Lothar growled, “The greatest danger may be passed, but the obvious one is still there. We have to
drive back the orcs and close the portal.”
 Khadgar thought of the vision, of Stormwind burning and Llane’s death. He thought of his own vision, of
his now-aged form in final battle with the orcs. Instead he said, “I must bury what’s left of Medivh. I
should find Garona. She couldn’t have gone far.”
 Lothar grunted an assent and shambled toward the entrance. At last he turned and said, “It couldn’t
have been helped, you know. We tried to alter it, but it was all part of a larger scheme.”
 Khadgar nodded slowly, “I know. All part of a greater cycle. A cycle that now at last may be broken.”

 Lothar left the former apprentice beneath the citadel, and Khadgar gathered up what was left of the
physical remains of the Magus. He found a shovel and a wooden box in the stable. He put the skull and
the bits of skin in the box with the tattered remains of “The Song of Aegwynn,” and buried them all deep
in the courtyard in view of the tower. Perhaps later he would raise a monument, but for the time being it
would be best to not let others know where the master mage’s remains were. After he had finished
burying the Magus, he dug two more graves, human-sized, and laid Moroes and Cook to rest to one side
of Medivh.
 He let out a deep sigh, and looked up at the tower. White-stoned Karazhan, home of the most mighty
mage of Azeroth, the Last Guardian of the Order of Tirisfal loomed above him. Behind him the sky was
lightening, and the sun threatened to touch the topmost level of the tower.
 Something else caught his eye, above the empty, entrance hall, along the balcony overlooking the main
entrance. A bit of movement, a fragment of a dream. Khadgar let out a deeper sigh and nodded at the
ghostly trespasser that watched his every move.
 “I can see you, now, you know,” he said aloud.
 Epilogue
 Full Circle
 The trespasser from the future looked down from the balcony at the no-longer young man of the past.
 “How long have you been able to see me?” asked the trespasser.
 “I have felt bits of you as long as I have been here,” said Khadgar. “From my first day. How long have
you been there?”
 “Most of an evening,” said the trespasser in his tattered red robes. “The dawn is coming up here.”
 “Here as well,” said the former apprentice. “Perhaps that is why we can talk. You are a vision, but
different than any I have seen before. We can see each other and converse. Are you future or past?”
 “Future,” said the trespasser. “Do you know who I am?”
 “Your form is different than when I last saw you, you are younger, and calmer, but yes, I know,” said
Khadgar. He motioned toward the three heaps of turned earth—two large and one small. “I thought I
just buried you.”
 “You did,” said the trespasser. “At least you buried much of what was the worst about me.”
 “And now you’re back. Or you will be back,” said Khadgar. “Different, but the same.”
 The trespasser nodded. “In many ways, I was never here the first time around.”
 “More is the pity,” said Khadgar. “So what are you in the future? Magus? Guardian? Demon?”
 “Be reassured. I am a better being than I was,” said the trespasser. “I am free of the taint of Sargeras
thanks to your actions this day. Now I may deal directly with the Lord of the Burning Legion. Thank you.
There cannot be success without sacrifice.”
 “Sacrifice,” said Khadgar, the words bitter in his mouth. “Tell me this then, ghost of the future. Is all that
we have seen true? Will Stormwind truly fall? Will Garona slay King Llane? Must I die, in this aged flesh,
in some nether-spawned land?”
 The being on the balcony paused for a long moment, and Khadgar feared that he would fade away.
Instead he said, “As long as there are Guardians, there is Order. And as long as there is Order, the parts
are there to be played. Decisions made millennia ago set both your path and mine. It is part of greater
cycle, one that has held us all in its sway.”
 Khadgar craned his head upward. The sun was now touching the top half of the tower. “Perhaps there
should not be Guardians then, if this has been the price.”
 “Agreed,” said the trespasser, and as the strong light of day began to grow, he began to fade. “But for
the moment, for your moment, we must all play our part. We all must pay this price. And then, when we
have the chance, we will start anew.”
 And with that the trespasser was gone, the last fragments of his being swept back into the future by an
errant wind of magic.
 Khadgar shook his aged head and looked at the three newly-dug graves. Lothar’s surviving men took
their dead and wounded back with them to Stormwind. There was no sign of Garona, and though
Khadgar would search the tower once more, he doubted that she was within. He would take what books
he thought were valuable, what supplies he could, and set protective wards over the rest. Then he would
leave as well, and follow Lothar into battle.
 Hefting his shovel, he walked back into the now-abandoned keep of Karazhan, and wondered if he
would ever return.

 As the trespasser spoke a small breeze kicked up, a mere churning of the leaves, but it was enough to
scatter the vision. The no-longer young man broke up and faded like dying fog, and the no-longer old
man watched him go.
 A single tear ran down the side of Medivh’s face. So much sacrifice, so much pain. Both to keep the
plan of the Guardians in place, and then so much sacrifice to break that plan, to break the world free of
its lock-step. To bring about true peace.
 And now, even that was at risk. Now one more sacrifice would have to be made. He would have to pull
the power from this place if he would succeed in what was to come. In the final conflict with the Burning
Legion.
 The sun had risen farther now, and was almost to the level of his balcony. He would have to work
quickly now.
 He raised a hand, and the clouds began to swirl above the peak of the tower. Slowly first, then more
quickly, until the upper ranges of the tower itself were encased within a hurricane.
 Now he reached deep within himself, and released the words, words made up of equal parts regret and
anger, words caught within him since the day that his life ended the first time. Words that laid claim to the
whole of that previous life, for good and ill. Accepting its power, and in doing so, accepting the
responsibility for what was done the last time he wore flesh.
 The hurricane around the tower howled, and the tower itself resisted his claim. He stated it again, and
then a third time, shouting to be heard over the winds that he himself had summoned. Slowly, almost
grudgingly, the tower gave up its secrets.
 The power burned from within the stones and mortars, and leached outward, channeled by the force of
the winds toward the base, toward Medivh. All the visions began to bubble loose of its fabric, and
stream downward. The fall of Sargeras, with its hundreds of screaming demons, fell in on him, as did the
final conflict with Aegwynn and Khadgar’s own battle beneath the dull red sun. Medivh’s appearance
before Gul’dan and the boyish battles of three young nobles and Moroes breaking Cook’s favorite
crystal, all were pulled into him. And with those visions came memories, and with those memories
responsibilities. This must be avoided. This must never happen again. This must be corrected.
 So too did the images and power leach upward from the hidden tower, from the pits beneath the tower
itself. The fall of Stormwind flamed upward at him, and the death of Llane, and the myriad demons
summoned in the middle of the night and unleashed against those in the Order too close to the truth. All of
them fountained upward and were consumed within the form of the mage standing on the balcony.
 All the shards, all the pieces of history, known and unrevealed, spiraled down the tower or rose from its
dungeons and flowed into the man who had been the Last Guardian of Tirisfal. The pain was great, but
Medivh grimaced and accepted it, taking the energy and the bittersweet memories it bore with equal
measure.
 The last image to fade was the one beneath the balcony itself, an image of a young man, a rucksack at
his feet, a letter marked with the crimson seal of the Kirin Tor, hope in his heart and butterflies in his
stomach. That youth was the last to fade, as he moved slowly toward the entrance, the magic surrounding
his vision, his shard of the past, spiraled upward, unraveling him and letting the energy pass into the
former Magus. As the last bit of Khadgar fell into him, a tear pooled at the corner of Medivh’s eye.
 Medivh held both hands to his chest tightly, containing all that he had regained. The tower of Karazhan
was just a tower now, a pile of stone in the remote reaches, far from the traveled paths. Now the power
of the place was within him. And the responsibility to do better with it, this time.
 “And so we start anew,” says Medivh.
 And with that, he transformed into a raven, and was gone.

My name is Thrall
The word means "slave" in the human tongue, and the story behind the naming is a long one, best left for another time. By the
grace of the spirits and the blood of heroes before me that runs in my veins, I have become Warchief of my people, the orcs,and
the leader of a group of races known as the Horde. How this came to be, too, is another tale. The one I wish to set to parchment
now, before those who lived it pass to dwell with the honorable ancestors, is the story of my father and those who believed in him;
and of those who betrayed him and indeed, all our people.
What might have become of us had these events not unfolded, not even the wise shaman Drek'Thar can say. The paths of Fate are
many and varied, and no sane being should ever venture down the deceptively pleasant one of "if only " What happened,
happened; my people must shoulder both the shame and the glories of our choices.
This is the tale not of the Horde as it exists today, a loose organization of orc, tauren, forsaken, troll, and
blood elf, but of the rise of the very first Horde. Its birth, like that of any infant, was marked by blood and pain, and its
harsh cries for life meant death to its enemies....
PROLOGUE
The power the stranger radiated swirled in glorious hues and vibrations, flowing like a cape behind him, encircling his mighty
head with light like a crown. The voice was audible in both the cars and the mind, and raced along the blood like a sweet song
long forgotten and now suddenly recalled.
What he offered was tempting, was exciting, and made the heart ache with yearning. But still, but still. . . there was something. . ..
When he had gone, the leaders of the eredar turned to one another and spoke softly, the words intended for their minds alone.
"It is little enough to ask, for what he offers us," said the first. He stretched, in the physical world and in the metaphysical one,
sending forth echoes of his strength.
"Such power," murmured the second, lost in thought. He was the elegant one, the beautiful one, and his essence was glorious and
radiant. 'And he speaks the truth. What he showed us will come to pass. No one can lie in such a telling."
The third was silent. What the second had said was true. The method by which this powerful being had demonstrated the truth of
what he offered could not be falsified, they all knew that. Still, this entity, this . . . Sargeras . . . there was something about him
that Velen misliked.
Velen's fellow leaders were also his friends. He was particularly close to Kil'jaeden, the most powerful and decisive of the three.
Friends they had been down the years that had slipped by unnoticed by beings beyond the reach of time. That Kil'jaeden was
inclined to accept the offer carried more weight with Velen than Archimonde's opinion, which, though usually sound, could
occasionally be swayed by appeals to his vanity.
Velen thought again of the image shown to them by Sargeras. Worlds for them to conquer, and more importantly, to explore and
investigate; for above all, the eredar were curious. For beings so powerful, knowledge was what meat and drink were to lesser
beings, and Sargeras offered them a tantalizing glimpse into what could be theirs if they would only . . .
Only swear their loyalty to him.
Only pledge the same for their people.
"As usual, our Velen is the cautious one," said Archimonde. The words could have been a compliment; instead, they struck Velen
as condescending. He knew what Archimonde wanted, and Velen knew the other viewed his hesitancy as nothing more than an
obstacle to what he, Archimonde, craved at this moment. Velen smiled.
"Yes, I am the cautious one, and sometimes my caution has saved us as much as your decisiveness, Kil'jaeden,
and your instinctive impetuosity, Archimonde."
Both of them laughed, and for a moment Velen was warmed by their affection. Then they quieted, and he sensed that they, at
least, had already made up their minds. Velen felt his heart sink as he watched them go, hoping that he would make the right
decision.
The three of them had always worked well together, their diverse personalities serving to balance one another. The result was
harmony and peace for their people. He knew that Kil'jaeden and Archimonde truly wanted what was best not only for themselves,
but for those they led. He shared that sentiment, and always before, they had reached agreement on such things.
Velen frowned. Why did the confident, appealing Sargeras unsettle him so? The others were obviously inclined to accept the
offer. Sargeras had told them that the eredar were exactly what he had been searching for. A strong, passionate, proud people, who
would serve him and advance a cause that would bring all worlds, everywhere, together. He would enhance them, he said. He
would change them, make them better, give them gifts that the universe had never before seen, for indeed, the universe had never
before brought together the powers that Sargeras claimed and the uniqueness that was the eredar. And what Sargeras had told
them would indeed come to pass.
And yet. and yet...
Velen went to the temple, where he had often gone before when troubled. Others were there this night, sitting in a circle around
the single pillar in the room that bore the precious ata'mal crystal. The artifact was ancient, so ancient that none among the eredar
could remember its origins, any more than they could remember their own. Legend had it that it was a gift bestowed upon them
long ago. The crystal had enabled them to expand both their mental abilities and their knowledge of the universe's mysteries. It
had been used in the past for healing, for conjuration, and, as Velen hoped to use it tonight, for visions. Respectfully, he went
forward and touched the triangular crystal. The warmth of it, like a small animal nestled in his hand, calmed him. He breathed
deeply, letting the familiar power penetrate him, then dropped his hand and returned to the circle.
Velen closed his eyes. He opened every part of him that could receive, body and mind and magical intuition. At first, what he saw
seemed only to confirm what Sargeras had promised. He saw himself standing with Archimonde and Kil’jaeden, lords not only of
their own noble and proud people but of countless other worlds. Power shimmered around them, power that Velen knew would be
as intoxicating as any liquor he might sip. Shining cities were theirs, along with the inhabitants of those cities, prostrating
themselves before the three with cheers and cries of adoration and loyalty. Technology such as Velen had never dreamed of
awaited his exploration. Tomes in strange tongues were translated for him, revealing magic hitherto unimagined and untold.
It was glorious, and his heart swelled.
He turned to look at Kil’jaeden, and his old friend smiled. Archimonde put a friendly hand on his shoulder.
Then Velen looked down at himself.
And cried out in horror.
His body was now gargantuan, but twisted and distorted. Smooth blue skin was now black and brown and gnarled, like some
once-noble tree disfigured by disease. Light radiated from him, true, but not the pure light of powerful, positive energy, but a
sickly green. Frantically he turned to behold his friends, his fellow leaders of the eredar. They, too, had been transformed. They,
too, retained nothing of what they had been but were now—
Man'ari.
The eredar word for something horrifically wrong, something twisted and unnatural and defiled slammed into his mind with the
force of a shining sword. He cried out again and his knees buckled. Velen pulled his gaze away from his tormented body,
searching for the peace and prosperity and knowledge Sargeras had promised him. He beheld only atrocities. Where before him
had been an adoring crowd, now he saw only mutilated corpses or bodies that, like his. like Kil’jaeden's, like Archimonde's, had
been transformed into monsters. Among the dead and the distorted capered beings that Velen had never before seen. Strange dogs
with tentacles sprouting from their backs. Tiny, twisted figures that danced and capered and laughed at the carnage. Deceptively
beautiful creatures, their wings outstretched behind them, who surveyed what had been wrought with delight and pride. Where
their cloven hooves fell, the earth died. Not just the grass, but the soil itself; all that gave life was obliterated, sucked dry.
This, then, was what Sargeras planned to do to the eredar. This was the "enhancement" he had spoken of so glowingly. If Velen's
people allied with Sargeras, they would become these monstrous things . . . these man'ari. And somehow Velen understood that
what he was witnessing was not a single incident. It was not just this one world that would fall. It was not even a dozen, or a
hundred, or a thousand.
If he threw his support behind Sargeras, everything would be destroyed. This legion of man'ari would keep moving forward, aided
by Kil’jaeden and Archimonde and—may all that was good and pure help him—Velen. They would not stop until everything in
existence was as scoured and blackened as this patch of ground that Velen viewed through blurred vision. Was Sargeras insane?
Or, worse, did he understand this and still crave it? Blood and liquid fire poured over everything, rained down upon him, burning
him and spattering him until he fell to the earth and wept.
The vision mercifully vanished, and Velen blinked, trembling. He was now alone in the temple, and the crystal glowed
comfortingly. He was grateful for that balm.
It had not happened. Not yet.
What Sargeras had told them was indeed true. The eredar would be transformed, and their three leaders would be offered power,
knowledge, domination . . . near-godhood.
And they would lose everything they held dear-would betray those they had vowed to protect—to do it.
Velen ran a hand across his face, relieved to find it damp only with sweat and tears and not the fire and blood of his vision. Not
yet, anyway. Was it even possible to halt this, or to mitigate the destruction the legion wrought in any way?
The answer floated back to him. as reviving and sweet as a draft of dear water in a desert: Yes.
They came at once, responding to the emotion in his mental plea. It was but the matter of a few moments to brush their minds and
let them see what he had seen, feel what he had felt. For a brief instant, he knew they shared his sentiments, and hope swelled
within him. There was yet a chance—Archimonde frowned, "This is not a glimpse into the future that We can verify. It is only
your hunch."
Velen stared at his old friend, then turned his eyes to Kil’jaeden. Kil’jaeden was not bound by his vanity as Archimonde was. He
was decisive and wise....
'Archimonde is right," Kil’jaeden said smoothly. "There is no veracity here, only an image in your own mind."
Velen looked at him. pain welling inside him. Gently, sorrowfully, he detached his thoughts from theirs. Now, what was in his
mind and heart stayed there. He would never again share it with these two who had once been like extensions of his own soul.
Kil’jaeden took the withdrawal as surrender, which was as Velen intended, and smiled as he placed a hand on Velen's shoulder.
"I do not want to give up what I know to be positive and good and true for what I fear might be unpleasant." he said. "Nor. I think,
do you."
Velen could not risk a lie. He merely looked down and sighed. Once. Kil’jaeden and even Archimonde would have seen through
such a feeble facade. But now, their thoughts were not on him. They were thinking about the apparently limitless power about to
be bestowed upon them. It was too late to sway them. These two once-great beings were Sargeras's playthings; they were on their
way to becoming man'ari. Velen knew with terrifying certainty that if they guessed that he was not with them, they would turn
upon him with deadly consequences. He had to survive, if only to do what precious little he could to save his people from
damnation and destruction.
So he nodded, but spoke nodding, and it was decided that the three leaders of the eredar would ally with the great Sargeras.
Archimonde and Kil’jaeden departed quickly to make the necessary preparations to welcome their new lord.
Velen grieved over his impotence. He wanted to save all of his people, as he had sworn to do, but he knew that was impossible.
Most would trust in Kil’jaeden and Archimonde, and follow them to their doom. But there were a few who thought as he did, who
would forsake everything merely upon his word. They would need to; their home world of Argus would shortly be destroyed,
devoured by the madness of the demonic legion. Those who would survive would have to flee.
But... flee where?
Velen stared at the ata'mal crystal, despair flooding through him. Sargeras was coming. There was no place on this world to hide
from such a being. How, then, would he escape?
Tears blurred his vision as he gazed at the crystal. Surely it was his tears that made it seem to shimmer and pulse. Velen blinked.
No ... it was no trick of the light seen through tears. The crystal was glowing, and before his shocked gaze, it rose slowly from its
pedestal and floated until it was directly before him. Touch it, a voice in his head said softly. Trembling, awestruck, Velen reached
out a strong blue hand, expecting to feel the familiar warmth of the quiescent prism.
Energy raced through him and he gasped. In intensity, it was almost as powerful as the dark energy that had surged through him in
the vision. But this was as pure as that had been foul, as light as that had been dark, and Velen suddenly felt hope and strength
well inside him.
The strange, glowing field about the ata'mal crystal grew, stretched upward, assumed a shape. Velen blinked, almost blinded by
the radiance but not wanting to look away.
You are not alone, Velen of the eredar, the voice whispered to him. It was soothing, sweet, like the sound of flowing water and the
rush of a summer wind. The radiance faded slightly, and hovering before Velen was a being unlike any he had ever seen. It
seemed to be comprised of living light. Its center was a soft golden hue, the outer radius a glowing, soothing violet. Strange
metallic-looking glyphs swirled around the center, calming and hypnotic, in a spiral dance of color and light. It continued to speak
inside his mind, a sound that seemed to Velen to be light itself given voice.
We, too, have sensed the impending horrors about to befall this and other worlds. We strive to keep the balance, and what
Sargeras is planning will rip apart everything. Utter chaos and ruination will descend, and the things that are good and true and
pure and holy will be lost beyond recovery.
Who . . . what . . . Velen could not even form the question in his mind, so swept away was he by this being's glory.
We are the Naaru, the radiant entity said. You may call me ... K'ure.
Velen's lips curved around the words, and as he whispered them aloud, "Naaru . . . K'ure . . . ," he tasted the sweetness of them, as
if speaking the names granted him some of their very essence.
This is where it all begins, K'ure continued. We cannot stop it, for your friends have free will. But you have reached out with an
anguished heart, to save what you can. And therefore, we will do what we can. We will save those of you whose hearts reject the
horror of what Sargeras offers.
What do I do? Again tears filled Velen's eyes, tears of relief and joy this time.
Gather those who will listen to your wisdom. Go to the highest mountain in the land on the longest day of the year. Take the
ata'mal crystal with you. Long, long ago, did we give it to you; it is how we will find you again. We will come and bear you away.
For a moment, a flicker of doubt, like a shadow flame, burned in Velen's heart. He had never even heard of such beings of light as
the Naaru, and now this entity, this K'ure, was asking him to steal his people's most sacred object. They even claimed that it was
they who had given it to the eredar in the first place! Perhaps Kil’jaeden and Archimonde had the right of it. Perhaps Velen's
vision was nothing more than his fear manifesting itself.
But even as the twisting thoughts raced through his mind, he knew them to be the last vestiges of a brokenhearted yearning for
everything to be as it once was, before things had changed so horribly ... before Sargeras.
He knew what he had to do. and he bowed his head before the glorious, dancing being of light.
The first and most trusted ally that Velen summoned was Talgath, an old friend and one who had aided him in the past. All rested
upon this friend, who would be able to move unwatched where Velen could not. Talgath was skeptical at first, but when Velen
linked their minds and showed him the dark vision he had been granted, Talgath quickly agreed. Velen said nothing of the Naaru
and their offer of aid, as he himself did not know what form that aid would take. He only assured Talgath that there was a way to
escape that destiny, if Talgath trusted him.
The longest day of the year was drawing close. With all the discretion he could muster, while Archimonde and Kil’jaeden were
obsessing over Sargeras, Velen sent out tendrils of thought to those he trusted. Others were gathered by Talgath. coming to
Velen's side in defense of themselves and their people. Velen then turned his attention to weaving the subtlest of magic webs
about the two traitors he once held as dear friends, so that their attention was not caught by the frantic activity occurring just
beyond their vision.
With startling speed and yet an agonizing slowness, an intricate web was created. When at last the day came, and the eredar who
had chosen to follow Velen assembled atop the tallest mountain of their ancient world. Velen saw that their number was
sickeningly small. They numbered only in the hundreds, these who were the only ones Velen truly trusted. He did not dare risk all
by contacting those he thought would possibly turn against him.
Only a short time ago, Velen had taken the ata'mal crystal from its place. He had spent the last few days fabricating a false one, so
that no alarm would be sounded when it was discovered missing. He had carved it from simple rock crystal with the utmost care,
casting a glamour upon it so that it would glow. But it remained dead to the touch. If someone brushed this false crystal with his
or her fingers, the theft would be revealed.
The true ata'mal crystal he now held close to his heart as he watched his people climbing the mountain, their strong legs and sure
hooves finding easy purchase. Many had already arrived and looked at him expectantly, the question clear in their eyes if not on
their lips. How, they were wondering, would they escape?
How indeed, Velen thought. For a moment he despaired, but then he recalled the radiant being who had linked its thoughts with
his. They would come. He knew it. In the meantime, everymoment that passed meant they were closer to being discovered. And
so many were not yet here, not even Talgath.
Restalaan, another old and trusted friend, smiled at Velen. "They" will be here soon," he said reassuringly.
Velen nodded. More than likely, Restalaan was right. There had been no sign that his old friends and now enemies Kil’jaeden and
Archimonde had been alerted to this outrageously bold plan. They had been far too consumed with anticipating their future power.
And yet, and yet.
The same deep instinct that had warned him to mistrust Sargeras now nagged at his mind. Something was not right. He realized he
was pacing.
And there they were.
Talgath and several others had cleared a rise, smiling and waving, and Velen exhaled in relief. He started down to meet them
when the crystal he held sent a powerful surge through his body. His blue fingers clenched tightly around the gem as his mind
opened to its warning. Velen's knees buckled as the mental stench assaulted him.
Sargeras had already begun. He had already started creating his hideous legion, taking eredar who had been foolish or trusting
enough to listen to Kil’jaeden and Archimonde and distorting them into the man'ari Velen had seen in his vision. There were
thousands of man'ari of everyphysical description and ability, lying just beyond his sight and sensing. They were disguised.
somehow. If he had not been holding the ata'mal crystal, he never would have sensed them until it was far, far too late.
It might already be too late.
He turned a shocked gaze to Talgath, suddenly aware that the taint was emanating from his old friend as well as from the
multitude—the Legion—of monsters who lurked beyond his sight. A prayer, wrenched from the utter depths of his despairing
soul, shivered up in his mind:
K'ure! Help us!
The man'ari were scrambling up the mountain now, sensing that they had been exposed and closing in like hungry predators for
the kill. Except Velen knew that death would be preferable to what these distorted eredar would do to him and those who followed
him. At his wit's end, Velen gripped the ata'mal crystal and thrust it upward to the sky.
As if the heavens themselves were cracking open, a pure shaft of radiant white light appeared. Its glory shone directly onto the
crystalline prism, and before Velen's stunned gaze, splintered the white light into seven distinct rays of various hues. Pain stung
Velen as the crystal he held shattered. The sharp edges sliced his fingers. He gasped and instinctively released the fractured
crystal, watching enraptured as the pieces hovered in the air, each transforming itself into a perfect sphere, and taking on the seven
radiant hues of the light that had once been a single, perfect shaft of pure white radiance. The seven crystals—red, orange, yellow,
green, blue, indigo and violet—shot upward, then sped to form an enclosure of light around the frightened forms of the gathered
eredar.
At that precise instant, Talgath raced toward him, naked loathing in his gaze. He slammed into the circle of multicolored lights as
if into a stone wall and tumbled backward. Velen whirled and saw the man'ari descend, snarling, drooling, their claws scrabbling
on a wall, made only of light, which yet protected Velen and his people.
A deep, thrumming sound raced along Velen's nerves, more felt than heard. He looked upward and on this day of wonders saw
something that surpassed even the miracle of the seven stones of light. He beheld what looked at first like a descending star, so
bright he almost could not bear looking upon it. As it drew closer, he saw that it was nothing so elusive as a star in the night skies,
but a solid structure, its center as soft and round as the orbs, adorned with jutting, crystalline triangles. Velen wept openly as a
mental touch brushed his mind:
/ am here, as I promised I would be. Prepare to abandon this world. Prophet Velen.
Velen extended his arms upward, almost like a child begging a loving parent to be swept up into an affectionate embrace. The orb
above him pulsed, and then Velen felt himself being lifted gently into the air. He floated upward, and saw that the others too were
rising toward the . . . vessel? For such Velen now understood it to be, though it also vibrated with a living essence that he could
not yet comprehend. In the midst of the quiet joy, Velen heard the shrieks and screams and bellows of the man'ari as their prey
escaped. The base of the ship opened, and a few seconds later Velen found himself standing on something solid. He knelt on the
floor, if such it could be called, and watched as the rest of his people floated toward safety. When the last one had arrived. Velen
expected the door to close and this ship—-this ship that was made of metal that was not metal, flesh that was not flesh, and what
Velen suspected was the very essence of K’ure—to depart.
Instead, he felt a whisper in his mind: The crystals— where there was one, there are seven. Recover them, for you will need them.
Velen leaned over the opening and extended his hands. With shocking speed, the seven crystals surged upward toward him,
striking his palms so hard he gasped. He gathered them close, ignoring the incredible heat they emanated, and threw himself
backward. At once, the door disappeared as if it had never been present. Clutching the seven ata'mal crystals, his mind stretched
so far he felt he was brushing the edge of madness. Velen hung suspended for an endless instant between hope and despair.
Had they done it? Had they escaped?
From his position at the head of the army. Kil’jaeden had an unobstructed view as the mountain was swarmed by his slaves. For a
glorious moment, he tasted victory, almost as sweet as the hunger Sargeras had planted in his mind. Talgath had done his job well.
It had only been pure luck that Velen had been holding the crystal at the moment of the onslaught; had he not, his body would be
lying on the ground, torn into a handful of fleshy bits.
But Velen had been holding the ata'mal crystal, and he had been warned. Something had happened—some strange lights had
sprung up protectively around the traitor, and something had come for them. Now as Kil’jaeden watched, the peculiar vessel
shimmered and ... disappeared.
He had escaped! Curse him, damn him, Velen had escaped!
The man'ari, whose delight had filled Kil’jaeden just seconds earlier, were now full of consternation and disappointment. He
touched all of their minds; they knew nothing. What was this thing that had come to snatch Velen from Kil’jaeden's very grasp?
Fear now shuddered through Kil’jaeden. His master would not be pleased with these developments.
"What now?" asked Archimonde. Kil’jaeden turned to look at his ally
"We find them," growled Kil’jaeden. We find them and destroy them. Even if it takes a thousand years."
ONE
My name is Thrall. The word means "slave" in the human tongue, and the story behind the naming is a long one, best left for
another time. By the grace of the spirits and the blood of heroes before me that runs in my veins, I have become Warchief of my
people, the orcs, and the leader of a group of races known as the Horde. How this came to be, too, is another tale. The one I wish
to set to parchment now, before those who lived it pass to dwell with the honorable ancestors, is the story of my father and those
who believed in him; and of those who betrayed him and indeed, all our people.
What might have become of us had these events not unfolded, not even the wise shaman Drek'Thar can say. The s of Fate are
many and varied, and no sane being should ever venture down the deceptively pleasant one of "if only. What happened, happened;
my people must shoulder both the shame and the glories of our choices.
This is the tale not of the Horde as it exists today, a loose organization of ore, tauren, forsaken, troll, and blood elf, but of the rise
of the very ftrst Horde. Its birth, like that of any infant, was marked by blood and pain, and its harsh cries for life meant death to
its enemies.
For such a grim and violent tale, it begins peacefully enough, amid the rolling hills and valleys of a verdant land called
Draenor... .
The heart-beat rhythm of the drums lulled the younger ores to sleep, but Durotan of the Frostwolf clan was wide awake. He lay
with the others on the hard-packed dirt floor of the sleeping tent. A generous padding of straw and a thick clefthoof pelt protected
him from the chill of the bone-cold earth. Even so, he felt the vibrations of the drumming travel up through the earth and into his
body, as his cars were caressed by the ancient sound. How he longed to go out and join them!
Durotan would have another summer before he would be able to participate in the Om 'riggor, the rite of adulthood. Until that
much-anticipated event, he would have to accept being shunted off with the children into this large group tent, while the adults sat
around the fire and talked of things that were doubtless mysterious and significant.
He sighed and shifted on the pelt, it was not fair.
The ores did not fight among themselves, but neither were they particularly sociable. Each clan kept to itself, with its own
traditions, styles and manner of dress, stories, and shaman. There were even variations
of dialect that differed so much that some ores could not understand one another unless they spoke the common tongue. They
almost seemed as different to one another as the other sentient race who shared the bounty of the field, forest, and streams, the
blue-skinned, mysterious draenei. Only twice a year, spring and autumn, did all the orc clans come together as they were doing
now, to honor that time when day and night were the same length.
The festival had officially started last night at moon-rise, though ores had been gathering at this spot for several days now. The
Kosh'harg celebration had been held on this sacred spot in the land the ores called Nagrand, "Land of Winds," which lay in die
benevolent shadow of the "Mountain of Spirits," Oshu'gun, for as long as anyone could remember. While ritual challenges and
combat were not unusual during the festival, true anger or violence had never erupted here. When tempers flared, as they
sometimes did when so many were gathered together, the shaman encouraged the parties involved to work it out peaceably, or else
they were to leave the holy area.
The land in this place was lush and fertile and calming. Durotan sometimes wondered if the land was tranquil because of the
willingness of the ores to bring peace to it, or if the ores were peaceful because the land was so serene. He often wondered such
things, and kept them to himself, for he heard no one else voicing such odd ideas.
Durotan sighed quietly, his thoughts racing, his heart thumping in answering rhythm to the voice of the drums outside. Last night
had been wonderful, stirring Durotan's soul. When the Pale Lady cleared the dark line of trees, in Her waning phase but still bright
enough to cast a powerful light that was reflected on the blankets of white snow, a cheer had gone up from the throat of every one
of the thousands of orcs assembled—wise elders, warriors in their prime, even children held in their mother's strong arms. The
wolves, both companions and mounts to the orcs,had joined in with exultant howls. The sound shivered along Durotan's veins as
the drumming did now, a deep, primal cry of salutation to the white orb who commanded the night skies. Durotan had glanced
around to behold a sea of powerful beings raising their brown hands, silvered in the light, to the Pale Lady, all with one focus. If
any ogre had been foolish enough to attack, it would have fallen in a matter of heartbeats beneath the weapons of this vast sea of
single-minded warriors.
Then had come feasting. Dozens of beasts had been slain earlier in the season, before the winter had set in, and dried and smoked
in preparation for the event. Bonfires had been kindled, their warm light merging with the fey, white glow of the Lady, and the
drumming had begun and had not stopped since.
He, like all the other children—lying on his clefthoof pelt, Durotan sniffed dismissively at the term—had
been permitted to stay up until he had eaten his fill and the shaman had departed. The shaman of every clan left, once the opening
feast had been consumed, to climb Oshu'gun, which stood careful watch over their festivities, enter its caverns, and be advised by
the spirits and their ancestors.
Oshu'gun was impressive even from a distance. Unlike other mountains, which were irregular and rough in their shape, Oshu'gun
erupted from the ground with the precision and sharp point of a spearhead. It looked like a giant crystal set into the earth, so clean
were its lines and so brightly did it glisten in the sun- and moonlight. Some legends told that it had fallen from the sky hundreds of
years ago, and it was so unusual that Durotan thought those tales might be right.
Interesting though Oshu'gun might be, Durotan always thought it a bit unfair that the shaman had to stay there for the entire
Kosh'harg festival. The poor shaman, he thought, missed all the fun. But then again, he suspected, so did the children.
During the day, there were hunts and game playing and retelling of the heroics of the ancestors. Each clan had its own stories, and
so in addition to the familiar tales Durotan had heard as a youngling, there were new and exciting adventures to listen to.
Entertaining as these were, and as much as Durotan enjoyed them, he burned to know what the adults discussed after the children
were drowsing in the sleeping tent, after their bellies were stretched full of good food and pipes had been smoked and various
brews had been shared.
He could stand it no longer. Quietly, Durotan sat up, his cars straining for any sounds to indicate that anyone else was awake. He
heard nothing, and after a long minute, he got to his feet and began to move slowly toward the entrance.
It was a long, slow progression in the darkened tent. Sleeping children of all ages and sizes were sprawled everywhere in the tent,
and one wrong move could awaken them. His heart racing with excitement at his daring, Durotan stepped carefully between the
only faintly glimpsed shapes, placing each large foot with the delicacy of the long-legged marsh birds.
It seemed to take an eternity before Durotan finally reached the flap. He stood, trying to calm his breathing, reached out—
And touched a large, smooth-skinned body standing right beside him. He jerked his hand back with a surprised hiss.
"What are you doing?" Durotan whispered.
"What are you doing?" the other orc shot back. Abruptly Durotan grinned at how foolish they sounded.
"Same thing you arc," Durotan replied, his voice still soft. All about them, the others slept on. "We can cither keep talking about it
or do it."
Durotan could tell by the size of the faint shape in front of him that the orc was a large male, probably
close to his own age. He couldn't place the scent or the voice, so it wasn't one of the Frostwolf clan. It was a daring thought—not
only to do something so forbidden as to leave the sleeping tent without permission, but to do so in the company of an orc not of
his own clan.
The other orc hesitated, the same thoughts no doubt running through his head. "Very well," he said at last. "Let's do it."
Durotan reached out again in the darkness, his fingers brushing the hide of the flap and curling around its edge. The two orc
youths pulled back the flap and stepped out into the frosty night.
Durotan turned to look at his companion. The other orc was brawnier than he, and stood a bit taller. Durotan was the largest of his
age in his clan, and unused to others being taller than he. It was a bit disquieting. His ally in mischief turned to look at him, and
Durotan felt himself being assessed. The other nodded, apparently satisfied with what he saw.
They did not risk words. Durotan pointed to a large tree close to the tent, and silently the two headed for it. For a moment that was
probably not as long as it felt, they were in the open, exposed to any adult who chose that instant to turn his head and see diem,
but they were not spotted. Durotan felt as exposed as if he were in bright sunlight, so powerful was die moon's glow reflected off
the crystalline snow. And surely the sound of the snow squeaking beneath their feet was as loud as the bellow of an enraged ogre.
At last they reached the tree and sank down behind it. Durotan's breath misted as he finally exhaled. The other orc turned to him
and grinned.
"I am Orgrim, line of Telkar Doomhammer, of the Blackrock clan," the youth said in a proud whisper,
Durotan was impressed. While the Doomhammer line was not the line of a chieftain, it was well known and honored.
"I am Durotan. line of Garad. of the Frostwolf clan." Durotan replied. Now it was Orgrim's turn to react to the fact that he was
sitting with the heir to another clan. He nodded approvingly.
For a moment they simply sat, reveling in the glory of their daring. Durotan began to feel the cold and wetness seep through his
thick hide cape, and got to his feet. Again, he pointed at the gathering, and Orgrim nodded. They carefully peered around the tree,
straining to listen. Surely now they would hear the mysteries for which they both hungered. Over the crackling sound of the huge
bonfire and the deep, steady beating of the drums, voices floated to them.
"The shaman have been kept busy this winter with the fever." Durotan's father. Garad. said. He reached down and petted the huge
white wolf who was drowsing by the fire. The beast, its white coat distinguishing it as a Frostwolf. made a soft crooning sound of
pleasure. "Soon as one of the younglings gets cured, another falls ill."
"I am ready for spring, myself," another male said, standing and tossing another log on the fire. "It's been harsh with the animals,
too. When we were preparing for the festival, we had a hard time finding clefthooves."
"Klaga makes a delicious soup from the bones, but she refuses to tell us what herbs she uses." a third said, glaring at a female who
was nursing an infant. The female in question, presumably Klaga, chuckled.
"The only one who'll get that recipe is this little one when she comes of age," Klaga replied, and grinned.
Durotan's jaw dropped. He turned his head to stare at Orgrim, who wore a similar expression of stunned dismay. This was what
was so important, so secret that the children were forbidden to leave the tent to listen to it? Discussions of fevers and soups?
In the bright light of the moon. Durotan had no trouble seeing Orgrim's face clearly. The other youth's brows drew together in a
frown.
"You and I can come up with something more interesting than this. Durotan." he said in a low, gruff voice.
Durotan grinned and nodded. He was certain of it.
The festival lasted for two more days. During the daytime and at night, when the two would sneak out together, they challenged
each other to different contests of skill. Racing, climbing, strength, sure-footedness— everything they could think of. And each
defeated the other almost as if they had planned on taking turns. When, on the last day. Orgrim loudly called for a fifth challenge
to break the stalemate, something inside Durotan made him speak.
"Let us not perform common, ordinary challenges," Durotan said, wondering where the words came from even as he uttered diem,
"Let us do something truly different in the history of our people."
Orgrim's bright gray eyes gleamed as he leaned forward. "What do you suggest?"
"Let us be friends, you and I."
Orgrim's heavily muscled jaw dropped. "But—we are not of the same clan!" he said, in a voice that indicated that Durotan might
have proposed a friendship between the great black wolf and the mild talbuk.
Durotan waved a dismissive hand. "We are not enemies," he said. "Look around you. The clans come together twice a year and
there is no harm in it."
"But . . . my father says it is precisely because we come together so seldom that the peace is kept," Orgrim continued. His brow
knotted with concern.
Disappointment colored Durotan's words with bitterness. "Very well. I thought you braver than the others, Orgrim of the
Doomhammer line, but you are no better than they—timid and shy and unwilling to see beyond what has always been done to
what is possible."
The words had come from his heart, but had Durotan calculated them and honed them for weeks, he could not have chosen better.
Orgrim's brown face flushed and his eyes snapped.
"I am no coward!" he snarled. "I back down from no challenge, you upstart Frostwolf!"
He sprang on Durotan then, knocking the smaller orc off his feet, and the two pummeled each other until the shaman needed to be
brought in for healing and lecturing on the inappropriateness of fighting in a sacred space.
"Impetuous boy," scolded the head shaman of the Frostwolves, an ancient orc female they called "Mother" Kashur. "You are not
too old to be beaten as a disobedient child, young Durotan!"
The shaman who tended Orgrim muttered similar displeased sounds. But even as blood streamed freely from his nose, and as he
watched the shaman heal a wicked gash on Orgrim's brown torso, Durotan grinned. Orgrim caught his gaze and grinned back.
The challenge had begun, the final challenge, so much more important than races or lifting stones, and neither
was willing to admit defeat ... to say that a friendship between two youths of different clans was wrong. Durotan had a
feeling that this particular challenge would end only when one of them was dead ... and perhaps not even then.
TWO
I remember when we first encountered the tauren. I remember Cairne Bloodhoof's deep voice and calm face. I remember sitting
oit the ground in a tent that could be broken down and erected with startling speed, and feeling oddly at home. We smoked pipes,
shared food and drink, felt the drumming in our bones, and talked. The tauren seemed to me bestial at first, but there was wisdom
and humor in them, and by the time the first round of negotiations had been conducted, I knew that the ores had a rare ally in
these half-bovine beings.
Night had fallen while we spoke, a soft night befitting this beautiful land. We left the tent and gazed up at stars too numerous too
count, a sweet wind caressing our faces. I turned to Drek'Thar, to ask for his wisdom. To my astonishment I saw tears on his face,
glinting in the moon's light.
"This is how we used to be, my chieftain," he said in a broken voice. He lifted his arms and tilted his head back, calling the wind
to embrace him and dry the tears on his strong green face. "Close to the earth. Close to the spirits. Strong in the hunt, gentle with
the younglings, knowing our place in the world to be right and just. Understanding the balance of taking and giving. The only
magic the tauren practice is the good, clean magic of the earth, and the land reflects that, the way Draenor once reflected our
connection."
I thought of the tauren's request for aid infighting their enemy, the vile, filthy centaur.
"Yes . . . I feel for them. It will be good to be able to help them," I said.
Drek 'Thar laughed, turning his blind eyes to me and seeing me more clearly than anyone with sight could.
"Oh, my young Thrall," he said, chuckling still, "you do not yet understand. They will help us."
Durotan ran as fast as his powerful young legs could carry him. His breath came fast, and sweat dappled his reddish-brown skin,
but he forced himself to keep going. It was summer, and his large, flat feet were bare. The grass was soft beneath him as he ran,
and occasionally he would step on the bright purple blossom of a dassanflower. The scent from the bruised plant traditionally
cultivated for healing wafted up like a blessing, inspiring him to run even farther, even faster.
Now he was on the fringe of the Terokkar forest, pushing forward into its cool, gray-green depths. He had to watch out for the
twining roots of the elegant trees lest he trip over them, and his pace perforce slowed. Soft lights glowed in the green heart of this
forest, and the calm it exuded was at sharp odds with Durotan's need for triumph. He increased his pace, leaping over fallen tree
trunks covered with moss, ducking under low-slung branches with the grace of a talbuk. His black hair, long and thick and spilling
all the way to the middle of his back, flew behind him. His lungs burned and his legs cried out for him to cease, but he ground his
teeth and ignored the pleas from his body. He was a Frostwolf, the heir to clan chieftaincy, and no Blackrock would possibly—
Durotan heard a fair approximation of a war cry behind him and his heart sank. Orgrim's voice, like Durotan's, was still sinking
toward the deep bellow that marked an adult male, but even Durotan had to admit it was already impressive. He willed his legs to
pump even harder, but they felt as heavy and unmoving as if they had been carved of stone. He watched in dismay out of the
corner of his eye as Orgrim came into his field of vision and then, with a final spurt of energy, raced past him.
The Blackrock orc extended his arm and lunged, managing to hit the tree trunk in the clearing that they had decided represented
the goal of the race right before Durotan did. Orgrim kept going for several more strides, as if his powerful legs, once put into
motion, were reluctant to stop. Durotan's legs had no such problems, and the heir to the Frostwolf clan fell forward, barely
catching himself. He lay facedown in the cool, sweet-smelling mossy earth, gasping for air,
knowing he should sit up, knowing he should challenge Orgrim again, but too exhausted to do anything other than lie on the forest
floor and recover.
Beside him, he heard Orgrim doing likewise, and then the other orc youth rolled over on his back and began to laugh. Durotan
joined in. The birds and small animals that inhabited the Terokkar forest were silent as two ores uttered sounds of mirth that,
Durotan thought as his lips curled past his still-forming tusks, probably sounded more than a little like the fierce war cries that
presaged a hunt.
"Ha," grunted Orgrim, sitting up and punching Durotan in a playful manner. "It is little effort to beat a stripling like you.
Durotan."
"You have so much muscle your brain is starved," Durotan retorted. "Skill is as important as power. But the Blackrock clan
wouldn't know about such things."
There was no malice in their banter. Their clans had been troubled at first by the friendship between the two youths, but Durotan's
stubborn argument—that just because something had never been done before did not mean it could not be done—amused and
impressed the leaders of both clans. It helped that both the Frostwolves and the Blackrocks were both traditionally even-tempered
orc clans. Had Durotan proposed such a friendship with a Warsong clan member or a Bonechewer, for example, known for their
intense clan pride and distrust of others, the little flame of friendship would have died quickly. So the elders watched. and waited
for the novelty to fade and for each youth to return to his rightful place and keep the familiar order that had been established for...
as long as anyone could recall.
They were disappointed.
The frost of late winter had given way to spring and now the full blowsy warmth of summer, and the friendship continued.
Durotan knew that they were watched, but as long as no one interfered, he did not object.
Durotan closed his eyes and let his fingers spread over the moss. The shaman said that all things had a life, a power, a spirit. They
were deeply involved with the spirits of the elements—earth, air, fire, and water—and the Spirit of the Wilds—and claimed they
could sense the life force in earth and even seemingly dead stone. All Durotan could feel was the cool, slightly moist sensation of
moss and soil beneath his palms.
The earth shuddered. His eyes snapped open.
He bolted upright, his hand automatically going for the spiked club that he constantly carried. Orgrim preferred a heavy metal and
wood hammer, the traditional weapon of the Blackrocks and a simplified version of the legendary hammer that would one day
come to him. The two boys exchanged glances. They did not need to speak to communicate. Was the thing that made the earth
shake so an enormous clefthoof, with its shaggy pelt that made magnificent blankets and rich
red flesh that could feed almost the whole clan, or was it something more dangerous?
What did live in the Terokkar forest, anyway? They had been here only once before....
They got to their feet in unison, their small dark eyes peering into the now ominous-seeming dark corners of the close-growing
trees, searching for whatever had made the noise.
Boom. The earth shuddered again. Durotan's heart started to beat faster. If it was a small clefthoof, maybe they could take it down
together and share the spoils with both clans. He glanced over at Orgrim and saw the other's eyes gleam with excitement.
Boom.
Boom.
Crash.
Both youths gasped and then retreated as the noise came closer. A tree only a few yards away from them seemed to splinter before
their eyes. The thing that had made the noise and so casually dispatched an ancient tree suddenly came into view.
It was enormous, it carried a club as big as they were, and it was most definitely not a clefthoof.
And it had seen them.
It opened its mouth and bellowed something that was vaguely intelligible, but Durotan wasn't about to waste time figuring out
what it had said.
Their thoughts as one, the two boys turned and fled.
Now Durotan wished desperately that they had not decided to challenge one another to a race earlier, for his legs had not hilly
recovered. Yet still they moved when he asked it of them, the need for survival lending him energy.
How had they wandered so far into ogre territory? And where were the gronn? Durotan imagined one of the ogre's masters forcing
its way through the trees as the ogre had—towering over ordinary ogres as ogres towered over the orcs,even more hideous than an
ogre, more of the earth than of flesh and yet so terribly wrong, its one eye bloodshot and staring as it pointed at Durotan and
Orgrim and directed the ogre toward it.
He and Orgrim were not yet of the season where they would be initiated into adulthood and permitted to go with the warriors of
the clans to hunt the ogres and, on rare occasions, the gronn themselves. They had gone on hunts that their clans had perceived as
less dangerous, for talbuk and other easy prey, but Durotan had always yearned for the day when he would be allowed to tackle
these fearsome creatures, winning honor for himself and his clan.
Now, he wasn't so sure. The earth continued to tremble, and the shouts of the ogre were coming more clearly now.
"Crush little ores! Me smash!" The roar that followed this almost made his ears bleed.
The thing was gaining on them. Despite his brain's panicked orders to his body to run faster, faster curse
you, he could not put any distance between him and the monstrous being that loomed so close that its vast shadow almost blotted
out what little light filtered through the tree branches.
The trees thinned and the light grew brighter. They were close to the edge of the forest now. Durotan kept running and burst into
the open space of the meadow, his feet falling again on soft grass, Orgrim was ahead of him, but not by much. Despair washed
through Durotan, followed hard by a black wave of fury.
They were not yet adults! They had not gone on their first real hunt, they had not danced by the fire with the females, they had not
bathed their faces in the steaming blood of their first solo kills. There was so much they had not done. To die a glorious death in
battle was one thing, but Theywere so overpowered by the hideous creature as to make their deaths humorous rather than
honorable.
Knowing it could cost him precious seconds, but unable to resist the impulse, Durotan turned his head to scream a curse at the
ogre before it smashed him as flat as a graincake with its club.
What he saw made his jaw drop.
Their rescuers did not utter a sound. They moved in silence, a quiet tide of blue and white and silver that seemingly sprang out of
the very air. Durotan heard the familiar whine of arrows shrieking through the air and a heartbeat later the ogre's cries were tinged
not with rage but with pain. Dozens of arrows, tiny things on that massive pale body, sprouted from it, and it halted its deadly
progress. It yelled and tried to brush the irritations from its skin.
A clear voice rang out. Even though he did not understand the language, Durotan recognized words of power when he heard them,
and his skin prickled. Suddenly the sky was filled with lightning. But this was unlike any lightning Durotan had seen invoked by a
shaman. Blue and white and silver energy crackled around the ogre, swirling about it and closing in on it like a net. The monster
bellowed again and fell. The earth shook.
Now the draenei, their bodies covered in some sort of metallic plating that reflected the cool hues of the magical energies in a
display that dazzled Durotan's eyes, dismounted and descended upon the fallen ogre. Blades flashed, more words of power and
command were uttered, and Durotan was forced to shut his eyes or be driven mad by the display.
At last silence fell. Durotan opened his eyes again to see that the ogre was dead. Its eyes still stared, its tongue protruded from its
parted lips, and its body was covered with red blood and black burn marks.
So great was the silence that Durotan could hear his own ragged breathing and that of Orgrim. The two looked at each other,
stunned by what they had just witnessed.
Both had seen the draenei before, of course, but only at a distance. They came now and then to each
clan, ready to trade their carefully crafted tools and weapons and decorative pieces of carved stone in exchange for the thick pelts
of the forest animals, brightly woven blankets, and raw materials the ores culled from land and stone. It had always been an
occasion of interest in the clans, but the exchanges only lasted a few hours. The draenei—blue-skinned, soft-spoken, eerily
arresting—did not invite closeness, and no clan leader had ever asked them to stay and share their hospitality. Relationships were
cordial but aloof, and everyone involved seemed to want it that way.
Now the leader of the group that had arrived so unexpectedly strode over to Durotan. From his position on the earth, Durotan saw
what he had never noticed when he had regarded the draenei from a distance.
Their legs did not go straight from their torsos to the earth. They curved backward, like . . . like a talbuk's, and ended in cloven
hooves that were encased in metal from the shiny blue hoof upward. And ... yes, it was most definitely a thick, hairless tail that
swished back and forth. Now their owner was bending over him, offering a strong blue hand. Durotan blinked, staring a moment
longer at the unexpected shape of the draenei's feet and the reptilian tail, then got to his feet unaided. He looked into a face that
bore strange plating on its head, like armor that had grown there. Black hair and a beard flowed over a colorful tabard, and the
piercing, glowing eyes were the color of a winter lake. "You are injured?" the draenei asked in halting common Orcish, his tongue
obviously having trouble wrapping itself around the guttural syllables.
"Only my pride," Durotan heard Orgrim mutter in his clan dialect. He, too, was somewhat stung. The draenei had obviously saved
both their lives, and he was grateful of course. But they had seen two proud orc youths running from danger. Granted, that danger
had been very real—one blow from that gigantic club would have squashed him and Orgrim into two small, crumpled piles—but
still.
The draenei may or may not have heard or understood Orgrim; Durotan thought he saw the lips curve in a smile. The draenei
glanced skyward, and to his dismay, Durotan realized that the sun was low on the horizon.
"You two have wandered far from home, and the sun settles to sleep," he said. "Which clan do you hail from?"
"I am Durotan. of the Frostwolf clan, and this is Orgrim of the Blackrock clan."
The draenei looked startled. "Two different clans? Were you challenging one another, that you wandered so far from your
respective homes?"
Durotan and Orgrim exchanged glances. "Yes . . . and no," Durotan said. "We are friends."
The draenei's eyes widened. "Friends . . . from two different clans?"
Orgrim nodded. "Yes." He added, somewhat defensively, "It is not traditional, but it is not forbidden."
The draenei nodded, but he still looked surprised. He regarded both of them for a moment, then turned to two of his companions
and murmured something in his native tongue. Durotan thought the language profoundly musical, like the sound of a stream
meandering over stones, or a bird's call. The other two draenei listened intently, then nodded. One took a waterskin from his belt,
drank deeply, and then began to run with a gait nearly as smooth and swift as a talbuk's, heading southwest where the Frostwolf
lands were. The second raced toward the cast, to the Blackrock clan.
The draenei who had been speaking with them turned. "They will notify your families that you are well and safe. You will return
home tomorrow. In the meantime, I am happy to offer you the hospitality of the draenei. My name is Restalaan. I am the leader of
the guards of Telmor, the town with which both your clans regularly trade. I regret to say I do not remember cither of you, but
then, the orc younglings seem a bit leery of us when We come to your territory."
Orgrim bristled. "I am afraid of no one and nothing."
Restalaan smiled a bit. "You ran from the ogre."
Orgrim's brown face darkened and his eyes glinted angrily. Durotan lowered his head slightly. As he had feared, Restalaan and the
others had borne witness to their shame, and now they would be mocked.
"That," Restalaan continued calmly, as if he had not noticed the effect his words had had on the two. "is wisdom. If you had not
fled, we would be sending two corpses home to your families tomorrow instead of two healthy, strong orc youths. There is no
shame in fear, Orgrim and Durotan. Only in letting fear prevent you from doing the right thing. And in your case, running was
definitely the right thing."
Durotan stuck out his chin. "One day, we will be strong and our full size. Then, it will be the ogres who fear us."
Restalaan turned a mild face to him, and to Durotan's surprise, he nodded. "I completely agree," he said. "Ores are powerful
hunters."
Orgrim narrowed his eyes, looking for the taunt, but there was none.
"Come," Restalaan said. "There are dangers in the Terokkar forest at night that not even the guards of Telmor would willingly
face. Let us go."
Though exhausted, Durotan found the strength to keep up a steady running pace; he would not twice be shamed in one day. They
ran for some time, and the sun eventually dipped below the horizon in a glorious display of crimson, gold, and finally purple. He
glanced up now and then, trying not to appear rude, but curious indeed at seeing these strangers at more than several yards'
distance. He kept waiting for the signs of a city—roads made by countless feet traveling the same path, fire cairns lighting a path,
the shadows of buildings against the darkening sky. He
saw nothing. And as they continued, he felt a quick stab of fear.
What if the draenei were not planning to help him and Orgrim after all? What if they were going to capture them, to hold them for
ransom? What if they were going to do something worse—sacrifice them to some dark god, or—
"Here we are," Restalaan said. He dismounted and knelt on the ground, moving aside some leaves and pine needles. Orgrim and
Durotan exchanged confused glances. They were still in the middle of a forest. No city, no roads, nothing at all. Both ores
gathered themselves. They were severely outnumbered, but they would not die without a fight.
Still kneeling on the pine-needle carpet, Restalaan uncovered a beautiful green crystal. It had been carefully hidden beneath the
everyday detritus of the forest. Durotan stared, enraptured at the beauty of the thing. It would fit into die palm of his hand, and he
ached to touch it, to feel that smoothness, that strange pulsing, against his skin. Somehow he knew it would exude a calm the likes
of which he had never experienced. Restalaan uttered a string of syllables that branded themselves on Durotan's brain.
"Kehla men samir, solay \amaa kahl."
The forest began to shimmer as if it were a reflection caught by a once-still lake into which a stone had been tossed. Despite
himself, Durotan gasped. The shimmering increased, and then suddenly there was no forest, no trees, only a large, paved road that
led up the side of the mountains to a place that contained images Durotan had never even conceived.
"We are in the heart of ogre country, though it was not so when die city was built so long ago," Restalaan said, rising. "If the ogres
cannot see us, they cannot attack us."
Durotan found his tongue. "But. .. how?"
"A simple illusion, nothing more. A trick of . . . the light."
There was something in the way he said this that made Durotan's skin prickle. Seeing the ore's confused expression, Restalaan
continued. "The eye cannot always be trusted. We think what we see is always real, that the light always reveals what is there the
same way at all times. But light and shadow can be manipulated, directed, by those that understand it. In the speaking of these
words and the touching of the crystal, I have altered how the light falls on the rocks, the trees, the landscape. And so your eye
perceives something entirely different from what you thought was there."
Durotan knew he still stared stupidly. Restalaan chuckled slightly. "Come, my new friends. Come where none of your people have
ever been before. Walk down the roads of my home."
THREE
Drek'Thar had not seen the cities of the draenei when they were at peace. He only saw them when ... well, I am getting ahead of
myself. But he told me that my father had walked the shining roads of the draenei, had eaten their food, slept in their buildings,
spoken with them fairly. Had caught a glimpse of a world so unlike our own that even today, it is hard to wrap one's mind around
it. Even the lands of the kaldorei are not so alien to me as what I have learned of the draenei. Drek 'Thar said that Durotan did
not have the words to describe what he saw; perhaps today, living in this land that bears his name and seeing what I have seen, he
would. Regret is a bitter taste. ...
Durotan couldn't move. It was as if the mysterious net of shining energy had flung itself about him as it had the ogre, and he was
as helpless to resist. He stared, his mouth slightly open, trying to make sense of what his eyes showed him. The draenei city was
glorious! Woven into the side of the mountain as if it had sprung from it, to Durotan's eyes it was a union of stone and metal, of
nature and artifice. He did not know exactly what he was seeing, but he knew it to be harmonious. With its concealing spell
dissolved, the city was revealed in its tranquil magnificence. Everything he saw drew the eye upward. Massive stone steps, wide
and blunt at the base and tapering toward the top, led to spherical dwellings. One reminded Durotan of a snail shell; another, of a
mushroom. The combination was striking. Bathed in the hues of the setting sun, the bold lines of the steps were softened, and the
domes seemed even more invitingly rounded.
He turned to see a similar expression of awe on Orgrim's face, and then saw the slight smile curving Restalaan's blue lips.
"You are welcome here, Durotan and Orgrim," Restalaan said. The words seemed to break the spell, and Durotan moved forward
awkwardly. The stone of the roads had been smoothed, by time or draenei hands, he could not say. As they drew closer, Durotan
could see that the city continued up the mountain. The architectural pattern of wide, bold steps leading to a softly curved structure
was repeated here. There were long roads, made of the same white stone that somehow did not seem to get dirty although at least
ten generations of ores had lived and died since the draenei had arrived. Instead of the skins and horns of animals slain in the hunt,
the draenei seemingly utilized the gifts of the
earth. Gleaming gems were everywhere, and there was that curious overabundance of light brown metal unlike any Durotan had
ever seen. The ores knew metal; they worked it to serve them. Durotan himself had helped in the hunt with axe and sword. But
this .. .
"What is your city made of?" Orgrim asked. It was the first thing he had said since the two began their odd journey in the
company of the draenei.
"Many things," Restalaan said amiably. They were passing through the gates now, and receiving curious, but not hostile, looks
from the denizens of this place. "We are travelers, fairly new to your world."
"New?" Durotan said. "It was over two hundred summers ago that your people came here. We were not as We are now."
"No, you are not," Restalaan agreed smoothly. "We have watched the ores grow in strength and skill and talent. You have
impressed us."
Durotan knew it was meant as a compliment, but somehow the comment stung. As if ... as if the draenei thought they were
somehow better than the ores. The thought came and went, fleeting as a brush from a butterfly's wings. He kept looking around,
and to his shame, wondered if that was not indeed the case. No orc dwelling was this ornate, this complicated. But then . . . the
ores were not draenei. They did not need, or choose, to live like the draenei.
"To answer your question, Orgrim, when We arrived here, We utilized everything We had brought with us. I know your people
build boats, to travel the rivers and lakes. Well, we came on a boat that could travel in the sky ... a boat that brought us here. It was
made of metal and . . . other things. Once we realized that this was to be our new home, we took part of the boat and used it in our
architecture,"
So that was the giant, muted, swirling metal that seemed at once to be made of copper and skin. Durotan's breath caught.
Beside him, Orgrim scowled.
"You lie! Metal cannot float!"
An orc would have growled and boxed Orgrim's cars—hard—for such insolence. The draenei merely chuckled.
"So one would think. But one would think that it would not be possible to summon the elements to fight an ogre if one did not
know better."
"That is different," sniffed Orgrim. "That is magic."
"So is this, of a sort," Restalaan said. He beckoned to one of his men and said something in his native tongue. The other draenei
nodded and hurried ahead.
"There is someone I would like you to meet, if he is not too busy," Restalaan said, then fell silent. Durotan had a thousand
questions but did not dare voice them, fearing that he would make himself look foolish. Orgrim seemed to have accepted
Restalaan's comment about magic, but both youths still craned their necks looking around.
They passed many draenei in the street, and once
saw a female who looked about their age. She was delicately built, but tall, and when Durotan met her gaze, she seemed startled.
Then a soft smile curved her lips and she ducked her head shyly.
Durotan felt himself smiling in return. Without thinking, he said, "In our encampment you would find many children. Where are
the draenei children?"
"We do not have many," Restalaan said. "Our people are very long-lived, and because of that we do not often have children."
"How long-lived?" asked Orgrim.
"Very," was all Restalaan would say. "Suffice it to say that I remember our arrival here."
Orgrim stared openly at their companion. Durotan wanted to elbow him, but he was too far away. He suddenly realized that the
young-seeming female they had just seen was probably nowhere near his age after all. At that moment, the scout that Restalaan
had dispatched returned and spoke quickly. Restalaan looked pleased at whatever the scout had to say, then turned, smiling, to the
two ores.
"The one who brought us to this world, our prophet, Velen, is staying here for several days. I thought he might wish to see you. It
is not often We get such visitors." Restalaan's smile widened. "I am very pleased to say that not only has Velen agreed to meet
you, he has invited you to stay with him this evening. You are to dine with him and sleep in the magister's house. This is a very
high honor indeed." Both boys were struck dumb. Dinner with the Prophet, the leader of all the draenei?
Durotan was beginning to think it might have been better if he had been squashed flat by the ogre's club.
They followed dutifully as Restalaan led them down the winding, climbing streets up through the foothills and to the large
building that sat highest on the mountain. The steps, perfectly square and solid, seemed to go on forever, and Durotan's breath
came quickly as they climbed. He reached the top and was regarding the snail-shell structure with interest when Restalaan said,
"Look back."
Durotan and Orgrim obeyed, and Durotan's breath caught in his throat. Below them, spread out like jewels on a meadow, was the
draenei city. The last bit of sunset painted them in flaming colors, then the sun settled over the horizon and all was bathed in
shades of purple and gray. Lights came on in the houses, and Durotan thought of the stars in the sky settling on the earth.
"I do not mean to brag, but I am proud of my people and our city," Restalaan said. "We have worked hard here. We love Draenor.
And I never thought to have the chance to share it with an ore. The ways of destiny are strange indeed."
As he said this, a deep, almost ancient sorrow seemed to settle on his strong blue features. He shook off the mood and smiled.
"Come in, and you will be attended to,"
Silent, shocked almost beyond the ability to speak, their young minds wide open to all the sights and sounds and smells of this
thoroughly alien place, Durotan and Orgrim entered the magister's scat. They were shown into rooms that while ornate and
beautiful made them feel oddly penned in. The curving walls, so attractive from the outside and no less lovely here, seemed to
confine rather than embrace them. Fruits sat in bowls ready for consumption, strange clothes were set out for them to wear, and a
tub of water so hot that it steamed sat in the middle of the room.
"That water is too hot to drink and is too much for steeping leaves," Durotan said.
"It is for bathing," the draenei replied.
"Bathing?”
"To wash the dirt from one's body," Restalaan said. Orgrim shot him a look, but Restalaan seemed to be quite serious.
"We do not bathe," Orgrim growled.
"We swim in the rivers in summer," Durotan said. "Perhaps this is similar."
"You do not need to do anything you feel uncomfortable with," said Restalaan. "The bath, the food, the clothes are here for your
pleasure. Prophet Velen will expect to see you in an hour. I will come for you then. Is there anything you need?"
They shook their heads. Restalaan nodded and closed the door. Durotan turned to Orgrim.
"Do you think we are in danger?" Orgrim eyed the strange materials and the hot water. "No," he said. "But... I feel like I am in a
cave. I would rather be in a tent."
"Me, too." Durotan went to the wall and tentatively touched the curving surface. It felt cool and smooth beneath his fingers; he
realized that he had expected it to feel warm and ... somehow alive.
Durotan turned and pointed at the water. "Do you want to try it?"
"No," Orgrim said. Both ores started laughing, and both eventually splashed their faces and found the warm water to be more
pleasant than anticipated. They ate the fruit, drank the water, and decided that the cloth vests laid out for their use were acceptable
to wear in place of their soiled, sweat-stiff tunics, but that they would keep their leather breeches.
The time passed more swiftly than they anticipated, and dicy were engaged in a challenge to bend one of the metal legs of a chair
when there came a soft knock on the door. They jumped guiltily; Orgrim had managed to twist the chair leg somewhat and it stood
a bit crookcdlv now.
"The Prophet is ready to see you now." said Restalaan.
He is an Elder, was the first thing Durotan thought as his eyes met those of Prophet Velen.
Seeing the other draenei up close had been startling enough. To behold Velen was something else again.
The Draenei Prophet was half a head taller than the tallest of the city guards Durotan had seen, but not as powerful-seeming
physically. His body, clad in soft, swirling, light tan robes, seemed less muscular than theirs. And his skin! It was a warm
alabaster hue. His eyes, deep set and wise, glowed a brilliant blue, and were encircled by deeply etched wrinkles, speaking of one
who was not just an Elder, but possibly even ancient. His silver hair did not flow down his back, as was the case with the others,
but was ornately braided and looped, exposing his pale skull. His beard flowed like a silver wave almost to his waist.
Not Elder. Not even ancient, Durotan thought as those intense blue, glowing eyes settled upon him and seemed to bore into his
very soul. Almost . . . outside of time altogether.
He thought about Restalaan's comment, diat he himself was over two hundred summers.
Velen was a good deal older than that.
"Welcome," Velen said in a mellow voice as he rose and inclined his head. The braids danced with the movement. "I am Velen. I
am glad that my people found you today, though I doubt not that in a few years you would be more than capable of handling an
ogre and even a gronn or two by yourselves."
Again, Durotan did not know how he knew this, but this was no idle compliment. Orgrim sensed it too, for he stood up even
straightcr and met the draenei's eyes evenly. Velen waved them to sit and they did so. Durotan felt awkward and ungainly, sitting
at the lavish tabic in the ornately carved chairs. When the food came out, he relaxed inwardly. Haunch of talbuk, roasted
whitefcathers, large rounds of bread, and plates heaped high with vegetables—this was food he knew and understood. Somehow,
he had expected something entirely different. But why? Their buildings and way of life might be vastly different from that of the
orcs,but like the orcs,the draenei lived off what the land could provide. The preparation was slighdy unusual—the ores tended to
cither boil dicir food or cook over an open flame, when they cooked at all; frequendy flesh was eaten raw—but overall, food was
food, and this food was delicious.
Velen was an excellent host. He asked questions and seemed genuinely interested in the responses: How old would the boys be
before they could hunt ogres? Choose a mate? What was their favorite thing to cat? Their favorite weapon? Orgrim. even more
than Durotan, warmed to the conversation and began talking of his prowess. To his credit, he did not need to embellish his stories.
"When my father passes, I will inherit the Doomhammcr." Orgrim said proudly. "It is an old and honorable weapon, passed down
from father to eldest child."
"You will swing it well. Orgrim," said Velen. "But I trust that it will be many years before you take on the name of
Doomhammer."
The fact that his father would have to die before he
would become Orgrim Doomhammer seemed to have momentarily escaped the young ore. and he abruptly grew solemn. Velen
smiled, with. Durotan thought, a hint of sorrow. At the movement, fine cracks appeared in Velen's face, the subtlest of spidcrwebs
on that smooth white surface.
"But describe this hammer to me. It must be a mighty weapon."
Orgrim brightened again. "It is enormous! The stone is black and blunt and powerful, and the shaft is made of carefully crafted
wood. Over the years, the shaft has had to be replaced, but the stone itself has not a chip on it. It is called the Doomhammer
because when its owner takes it into battle, it spells doom for the enemy."
"I sec," said Velen, still smiling.
Orgrim was warming to his task. "But there is also another prophecy," he continued. "It is said that the last of the Doomhammer
line will use it to bring first salvation and then doom to the orc people. Then it will pass into the hands of one who is not of the
Blackrock clan, all will change again, and it will once again be used in the cause of justice."
"That is a powerful prophecy," said Velen. He said no more, but Durotan felt a shiver. This man was dubbed "Prophet" by his
people. Did he know if the Doomhammer prophecy would come true? Did Durotan dare to ask?
Orgrim continued, describing the Doomhammer in loving detail. Durotan, who had seen the weapon in question, ceased
listening to Orgrim's chatter and focused on Velen, Why was this being so interested in them?
Durotan was a sensitive youth, he knew. He had overheard some snippets of conversation from his parents, who were worried
about such sensitivity, and from Mother Kashur. who scoffed at them and told them to worry about important things and to "leave
the boy to his fate." Durotan knew fcigncd interest when he saw it. and felt that he'd recognize it even in a draenei. But Velen's
brilliant blue eyes were bright and focused, his kind if ugly face open, his questions sincere. He wanted to hear about the ores.
And the more he heard, the sadder he seemed to become.
/ wish Mother Kashur could be here instead of me, Durotan thought suddenly. She would appreciate this opportunity more than
Orgrim or I could.
When Orgrim had finished describing the Doomhammer. Durotan asked, "Can you tell us of your people. Prophet? We know so
litdc. In the last few hours I have learned more than any of my people have over the last hundred years, I think."
Velen turned glowing blue eyes to Durotan. Durotan wanted to quail from that gaze, not because he was afraid of it. but because
he had never before felt so...seen.
"The draenei have never withheld information, young Durotan. But... I believe you may be the first who has ever asked. What do
you wish to know?"
Everything, Durotan wanted to stay, but instead focused his question. "The ores had never met the draenei until two hundred
summers past. Restalaan said you came here in a great vessel that can travel the skies. Tell me more of this."
Velen took a sip of the beverage that tasted like summer to Durotan and smiled. "To begin with, 'draenei' is not our true name. It is
a term that means ... 'exiled ones.
Durotan gaped.
"We disagreed with others in our world. We chose not to sell our people into slavery, and for that we were exiled. We have spent
much time finding a suitable place to dwell—a place to call our own. We fell in love with this land, and We call it Dracnor."
Durotan nodded. He had heard the term before. He liked how it sat on his tongue when he spoke it, and the ores did not have a
name for this place other than "world."
"It is our term, We have not the arrogance to think the ores would use it as well. But such We have dubbed it, and We love
Dracnor deeply. It is a beautiful world, and We have seen many,"
Orgrim gasped. "You have seen other worlds?"
"Indeed We have. And We have met many people."
"People like the ores?"
Velen smiled gently. "There is no one like the ores," he said, respect resonant in his voice. "You are unique in our travels."
Durotan and Orgrim looked at each other and sat up a little straightcr in their chairs.
"But yes, we had been traveling for some time before we found this land. Here we are. and here we will stay."
Durotan burned to ask more—to ask how long they had been traveling, what their homeland had been like, why they had left it.
But there was something in Velen's timeless face that told him that although he had been invited to inquire, the draenei leader
would not tell him that particular talc.
So instead he asked about how they had tamed the nature of their weapons and magic. "Our magic comes from the earth." Durotan
said. "From the shaman and the ancestors."
"Our magic comes from a different source." Velen said. "I do not think you will understand it if I explained it.
Orgrim said indignantly, "We are not stupid!"
"Forgive me, I did not mean to imply that," Velen said at once. It was a graceful and sincere apology, and again Durotan was
impressed. "Your people are wise and you two are obviously bright. But... I am not sure I have the words in your language. I have
no doubt that if I had the time and vocabulary you would understand."
Even in the explanation he seemed to grope for the words. Durotan thought of the sort of magic that could disguise a city, thought
of the soft, uncanny metal somehow melded with gems of the earth and
solid stone, and realized that Velen was right. There did not breathe an orc who could have grasped all of this in a single evening,
though he suspected Mother Kashur would have an intrinsic comprehension, and he again wondered why it was that the two races
did not interact more.
The conversation turned to more mundane topics. The two youths learned that deep in the Terokkar forest was a spot, sacred to the
draenei, called Auchindoun. Here, the dead were laid to rest, placed in the ground instead of being burned on pyres. Privately,
Durotan thought this odd, but held his tongue. Telmor was the closest town to this "city of the dead," and Velen had come on a sad
mission, to lay to rest some who had died fighting the same ogre that had almost claimed Orgrim and Durotan earlier that day.
Normally. Velen explained, he lived in a beautiful place called the Temple of Karabor. There were other draenei towns, but the
largest was to the north, a place called Shattrath.
At last, the meal was over. Velen sighed, and his eyes rested on his empty plate, but Durotan felt certain the Prophet did not see it.
"You will excuse me." Velen said, rising. "It has been a long day, and I must meditate before I sleep. It has been an honor to meet
you, Durotan of the Frostwolf clan, and Orgrim. of the Blackrock clan. I trust you will sleep well and deeply, safe within these
walls, where none of your people has been before." Durotan and Orgrim rose with the others and bowed. Velen smiled with,
Durotan thought, a hint of that strange sorrow he had glimpsed in the draenei leader earlier.
"We will meet again, young ones. Good night." The two ores left shortly afterward. They were escorted to their rooms and indeed
slept well, though Durotan had a dream of an old orc sitting quietly by his side, and wondered what it meant.
"Bring him," the old orc said to Mother Kashur.
Mother Kashur, the eldest shaman of the Frostwolf clan, slept deeply. Because of her high position of honor, her tent was second
in lavishncss only to that of Garad, the clan leader. Thick rugs of clefthoof fur kept her old bones from the cold of the earth, and a
loyal and loving granddaughter tended to her needs, cooking and cleaning and keeping the fire stoked on cold days for the clan's
"mother." Mother Kashur's duty was to listen to the wind and water and fire and grass, and drink the bitter herbal beverage each
night that opened her mind to visits from the ancestors. She gathered information for her clan the way the others gathered fruits
and firewood, and this gift nourished them as deeply.
The old orc was not present, and yet she knew he was real. He was in her dream, and that was enough for her. In this dream state,
she was young and vibrant, could see her ruddy skin glowing with health, knew
her form to be sleek and knotted with muscle. The old orc was the age at which he had died, the age at which his wisdom had been
at its height. His name had been Tal'kraa in life, but now, although he was many generations distant from her, she called him only
Grandfather.
"You received the message," Grandfather told the young, vibrant dream-Kashur. She nodded, her dark hair flowing with the
movement.
"He and the Blackrock boy are with the draenei," she said. "They will be safe. I can feel it."
Grandfather Tal'kraa nodded, his thick jowls shaking with the movement. His tusks were yellowed with age and one had been
broken off in a battle long since forgotten.
"Yes, they are safe. Bring him."
It was the second time he had said this, and Kashur was not certain as to what he meant.
"He will come to the mountain in a few months, when the trees shed their leaves to sleep," she said. "So yes, I will bring him."
Tal'kraa shook his head fiercely, his brown eyes narrowed in annoyance, Kashur smothered a smile; of all the spirits that honored
her with their presence. Grandfather Tal'kraa was one of the least patient.
"No, no," Tal'kraa growled. "Bring him to us. Bring him to the caverns of Oshu'gun. I would look upon him there."
Kashur inhaled swiftly. "You ... wish me to take him to meet the ancestors?" "is that not what I just said? Foolish girl! What has
happened to the shaman these days?"
It was a rant he went on frequently and it troubled Kashur not in the slightest. She was too stunned by the import of what he had
just said. Sometimes the ancestors had wanted to see a child before; it was infrequent, but it had occurred. Usually it meant that
the child in question was destined for the shamanic path. She had not thought Durotan's feet would walk that road; it was rare that
a shaman led a clan. There would be too much pulling him in each direction for him to be an effective leader. To both listen to and
honor the spirits and to guide one's people well were more than most ores could manage. One who could do both would be a
remarkable orc indeed.
When Kashur did not reply. Grandfather growled and slammed his staff on the ground. Kashur jumped slightly.
"I will bring him on his initiation day," Kashur assured her ancestor.
"At last, you understand," Tal'kraa said, shaking his staff at her. 'And if you fail me, I will take my staff to your head instead of the
innocent earth."
He could not completely hide a smile as he said it, and Kashur smiled back as her dream-self closed her eyes. For all his bluster
and short temper, Tal'kraa was wise and kind and loved her deeply. She wished she had known him when he was alive, but he had
died almost a hundred years ago.
Kashur's eyelids fluttered open, and she sighed as her spirit returned to her current, real body ... as old as Tal'kraa had been when
he died, hands and feet curled up with joint pain, body weak, hair stark white. She knew in her heart that the time would soon
come when she would be able to leave this body, this shell, for the final time and be with the ancestors in the sacred mountain.
Drek’Thar, her apprentice, would then be the advisor to Garad and the rest of the Frostwolf clan. She had every confidence in him,
and actually looked forward to the day when she would be pure spiritual energy.
Although, she mused as the sunlight trickled in and the birdsong caressed her cars, she would miss the things that being alive
granted her, the simple things like birdsong and hot food and the loving touch of her granddaughter.
Bring him, Grandfather had said.
And so she would.
FOUR
Last night, with the moon full overhead and the stars gleaming as if in approval, a young male was initiated into adulthood. It was
the first time I have had the chance to be part of this ritual, the Om'riggor. In my earlier years, I was cut off from the rites and
traditions of my people; and truth be told, all ores had been cut off from such rites for too long. And once I had set my feet on my
destiny's path, I had become embroiled in battle. War consumed me. Ironically, the need to protect my people from the Burning
Legion and to give them a place where our traditions could again flourish took me far away from these things.
But now, Durotar and Orgrimmar are established. Now, there is a peace, tenuous though it might be. Now there are shaman
reclaiming the ancient ways, young males and females coming of age who, if the spirits will it, may never know the ashy taste of
war.
Last night, I participated in a timeless ritual that had been denied an entire generation.
Last night, my heart was filled with joy and the sense of connection for which I had always longed.
Durotan's heart hammered in his chest as he stared at the talbuk. It was a mighty beast, worthy prey, its horns not for mere
decoration but sharp and dangerous. Durotan had seen at least one warrior gored to death, impaled upon the twelve prongs as
surely as if upon a spear.
And he was to take it down with only a single weapon and no armor.
There had been the whispers, of course. Any mature talbuk will do to satisfy the needs of the ritual, he had heard someone murmur
in his car as he sat blindfolded in the waiting tent. They are all fierce fighters, but at this season, the males have shed their horns.
Other whispers: You may only carry one weapon, Durotan, son of Garad; but you could hide armor in the wilderness where no
one would know.
And, most shameful of all: Theshaman will determine if you are successful by tasting the blood upon your face; the blood from a
long-dead talbuk tastes exactly like that of one freshly slain.
He ignored all the temptations. Perhaps there had been other ores who had succumbed to them, but he would not be among them.
Durotan would seek out a female, who was quite well equipped with horns at this time of year; he would take the one weapon he
was permitted, and it would be the blood of the beast hekilled, steaming in the cold air, that would anoint his checks.
And now. standing in the early, unexpected fall of snow, his axe growing ever heavier in his hand, Durotan shivered. But he never
faltered.
He had been tracking the talbuk herd for two days now, surviving only on what he could gather, creating meager fires in the
twilight that bathed the snow in a rich lavender hue and sleeping in what shelter he stumbled upon. Orgrim had already completed
his rite of passage. Durotan envied the fact that his friend had been born in summer. He had thought it would still not be too
difficult in early autumn, but winter had decided to come ahead of time and the weather was bitter.
It seemed as if the talbuk herd, too, was taunting him. He could come upon their tracks and droppings easily enough, see where
they had scraped the snow for dried grass or pulled bark from the trees. But they always seemed to elude him. It was late
afternoon on the third day when it appeared as though the ancestors had decided to reward his determination. Twilight was
coming, and Durotan had thought with a sinking heart that he would have to again seek shelter to mark the end of a fruidess day.
Then he realized that the small pellets of dung were not frozen hard, but fresh.
They were close.
He began to run, the snow squeaking beneath his fur boots, a new warmth filling him. He followed the tracks as he had been
taught, cleared a rise—
And beheld a herd of the glorious creatures.
Immediately he crouched behind a large boulder and peered around to gaze at the beasts. They were still dark brown against the
white snow, their winter coats not yet upon them. There were at least two dozen, maybe more, mostly females. It was good that he
had found the herd, but now he had another problem. How would he take down just one? Talbuk. unlike many prey animals,
would protect others in their herd. If he attacked one. the rest would come to defend it.
Shaman accompanied the hunters in order to distract the animals. Durotan was alone, and suddenly he felt very vulnerable.
He frowned and rallied himself. He had been searching for these creatures for almost three days, and now here they were.
Nightfall would see a fresh haunch of meat devoured by a hungry orc youth, or it would see a stiffening orc corpse in the snow.
He watched them for a while, aware that the shadows were lengthening, but not wanting to hurry and make a fatal mistake. The
talbuk were diurnal creatures, and they were busy digging hollows in the snow in which to curl up. He knew they did such a thing,
but now he watched in dismay as they settled in tightly against one another. How would he separate one?
Movement caught his eye. One of the females, young and healthy from a gentle summer spent feasting on sweet grass and berries,
seemed to be in a feisty mood. She stamped and tossed her head—crowned with a glorious set of horns—and almost danced
around the others. She did not seem inclined to join them, but like one or two others, opted to sleep on the outside of the cluster of
furry bodies.
Durotan began to grin. What an offering from the spirits! It was a good omen. The liveliest, healthiest doc in the herd, the one who
did not need to follow mindlessly, but chose her own path. While that choice would likely be her death, it would also give Durotan
a chance to win his honor and right to be treated as an adult. The spirits understood the balance of such things. At least, he was
told they did.
Durotan waited. Twilight came and went, and the sun sank below the mountains. With the sun went even the feeble warmth it had
hitherto provided. Durotan waited with the patience of the predator. Finally, even the edgiest of the herd tucked up its long legs
and bedded down with its fellows.
At last, Durotan moved. His limbs were stiff and he almost stumbled. He crept slowly from his hiding place behind the boulder
and went down the slope, his eyes on the drowsing female. Her head drooped on its long neck, and her breathing was regular. He
could see small white puffs appearing in front of her muzzle.
Slowly, placing his feet as carefully as he could, he moved toward his quarry. He did not feel the cold; the heat of anticipation, the
powerful focus, drove any sensations of discomfort away. Closer still he came, and still the talbukdoc dreamed.
He lifted his axe. He swung it down.
Her eyes opened.
She tried to scramble to her feet, but the death blow had already come. Durotan wanted to scream the battle cry he had heard his
father utter so many times, but he bit it back. It would not do to slay the talbuk only to be slain himself by a dozen of her herd in
retaliation. He had sharpened the blade to shocking keenness, and it sliced through the thick neck and vertebrae as if slicing
through cheese. Blood spurted, the warm sticky fluid spattering Durotan gently, and he smiled fiercely. Anointing himself with the
blood of his first solo kill was part of the ritual; the talbuk doc had done it for him. Another good omen.
Silent though he had tried to be, he heard the sounds of the awakening herd. He whirled, breathing heavily, and let loose with the
blood-chilling battle cry his throat had been aching to utter. He held his axe, the gleam of its metal blade now obscured with
crimson blood, and bellowed again.
The talbuk hesitated. He had been told that if it was a clean kill, they would flee rather than attack, intuiting on some primal level
that they could no longer help their fallen sister. He hoped this was true; he might be able to take down one or two, but would fall
beneath their padded feet if they chose to attack.
Moving as one, they began to back away, and then finally whirled and turned to run. He watched them gallop over the rise to
disappear, their pawprints in the pristine snow the only evidence that they had been here.
Durotan lowered his axe, panting with exertion. He raised it again and let out a cry of triumph. His empty belly would be full
tonight; the spirit of the talbuk would enter his dreams. And on the morrow he would return to his people an adult male, ready to
take his place in serving the clan.
Ready to one day become its leader.
"Why do we not ride?" Durotan asked petulantly, glowering like a child.
"Because that is not the way it is done," Mother Kashur said curtly. Irritated, she cufFcd the boy. Durotan was young and fit; the
lengthy hike to the sacred mountain of the ancestors was as nothing to him. She, on the other hand, would have deeply appreciated
being able to ride atop her great black wolf Drcamwalkcr. But the traditions were ancient and specific, and as long as she was able
to walk, walk she would. Durotan bowed his head in acknowledgment as Theycontinued on.
Despite the fact that each trip exhausted her more than the previous one, Mother Kashur felt a sense of excitement that helped
temper the pain and weariness. She had taken many a youngling—both male and female, for each was as valued as the other—on
this final part of their rite of adulthood. But never before had she been asked to bring one before the ancestors. She was not too old
to be curious.
It was less than a few hours for the young, about a day for the older bones to make the trip. Evening was coming and they were
almost there. Mother Kashur looked up at the familiar shape of the mountain and smiled. Unlike other mountain ranges, whose
angles seemed to be random. Oshu'gun's spire was a perfect triangle. Gleaming like crystal, its facets catching the sun. it
resembled the surrounding terrain not at all. It had come from the heavens, long ago, and the spirits had been drawn to it. It was
for this reason the ores had settled here, in its sacred shadow. Whatever squabbles and petty differences they had as living beings,
they were as one here, inside this mountain. She would go there again soon, she knew, but not as a hobbling, elderly woman. This
was her last visit in such a broken vessel. The next time Kashur approached Oshu'gun, she would come as a spirit, floating in the
air as the birds did, her heart light and clean and made new.
"What's wrong, Mother?" Durotan asked, concern in his young voice. She blinked, coming out of her reverie, and smiled at him.
"Not a thing," she assured him truthfully.
The shadows had chased away the sunlight by the time they reached the foot of the mountain. They would sleep here tonight and
begin their ascent at dawn. Durotan fell asleep first, wrapped in the hide of the talbuk doc he himself had slain not too long ago,
and Mother Kashur watched him fondly as he slept the deep sleep of the innocent. She herself would have no dreams; her mind
needed to be clear if she was to be ready to receive visions on the morrow.
The climb was a long, tiring one, harder by far than the simple hike to reach the mountain, and Kashur was grateful both for her
sturdy staff and Durotan's strong hand. But today, Kashur's feet seemed to move more surely her lungs work more efficiently as
she and her young charge climbed. She felt as if the ancestors were pulling her forward, aiding her physical body with the power
of their spirit ones.
They paused at the entrance of the sacred cave. It was a perfect oval in the smooth surface of the mountain, and as always, Kashur
felt as though she were entering the womb of the earth. Durotan tried to look brave, but succeeded only in looking slighdy
nervous. Mother Kashur did not smile at him. He should be nervous. He was about to enter sacred space at the specific request of
one of his long-dead ancestors. Even she was not unmoved.
She lit a bundle of dried grasses that gave off a sweet, pungent scent, and waved the smoke over him to purify him. Then she
marked him with the blood his own father had shed for this moment, kept carefully in a small stoppered leather bag. Kashur
placed her withered hand upon his smooth, low brow, murmured her blessing, and then nodded.
"You well know that few are called before the ancestors who do not walk the path of the shaman," she said
gravely. Brown eyes wide, Durotan nodded. "I do not know what will happen. Maybe nothing. But if something occurs, you know
to behave with honor and respect to the beloved dead."
Durotan swallowed and nodded again. Then he took a deep breath and stood straight and tall, and in the yet-unmolded body of the
boy, Kashur saw a hint of the clan chieftain to come.
Together, they went inside, Mother Kashur going first to light the torches that lined the walls. The orange illumination showed
them the downward twining path, worn smooth by years of bare or booted orc feet. Here and there steps had been carved, to make
those pilgrim's feet more secure. It was always cool inside this tunnel, warmer than it was outside in winter. Kashur let her hand
brush the sides of the wall, remembering the first time she had come here long ago, the blood of her mother wet on her own face,
her eyes wide, her heart racing.
Finally, the long, gentle downward slope cased. There were no more torches on the wall to light, and Durotan looked at her,
puzzled.
"We will not need to bring fire to come before the ancestors," Kashur said. They continued on a level surface, traveling into
darkness. Durotan was not frightened, but he did look confused as they left the comfort of fire behind.
Now it was completely dark. Kashur reached out a hand and grasped Durotan's to guide him. His strong. stubby fingers folded
gently around hers. Even now, when he might be expected to clutch my hand, he remembers how it aches, she thought. The next
Frostwolf chieftain would have a considerate heart.
They continued without speaking. And then ... subtly, like the arrival of dawn after a long, dark night, light began to grow around
them. Now Kashur could dimly see the shape of the youth who stood beside her, so much younger than she and yet already
walking in the body of a grown male. She watched him as they moved forward; the miracle of the cave of the ancestors was familiar to her, but Durotan's reaction was not.
His eyes widened and he inhaled swiftly as he looked around. The glow emanated from a pool in the center of the cavern, casting
a soft white light over everything. All was smooth and soft and dimly radiant; there were no sharp angles or rough places, and
Kashur felt the familiar sensation of deep peace wash over her. She let Durotan look his fill in silence. The cavern was huge,
larger than the main drumming and dancing area at the Kosh'harg festival, and branching tunnels led to places that Kashur had
never dared explore. It would have to be so large, would it not, to be able to host the spirit of every orc who had lived and died?
She walked to the water and he followed her, watching her closely. She removed the pack she carried and gestured that he do
likewise. Carefully, Kashur removed several watcrskins, opened them, and with a soft prayer added their water to the glowing
liquid.
"You asked about the watcrskins as we departed," she said quietly to Durotan, "The water in here is not native to this place. Long
ago, we began offering blessed water to the spirits. Every time we come, we contribute to the sacred pool. And even so, I know
not how, the water docs not dissipate as it would in an ordinary hollow. Such is the power of the Mountain of Spirits."
Once she had emptied the watcrskins, she sat down with a soft grunt and peered into the luminous depths. Durotan emulated her.
She knew the angle at which she could see her reflection and made sure they were both positioned correctly. At first, all she could
see was her own face and that of Durotan. Their features looked spectral themselves, reflected in a white pool rather than a dark
one.
Then a third figure joined them, as if Grandfather Tal'kraa were standing right beside her shoulder, his reflection as clear as theirs.
Their eyes met, and Kashur smiled.
She craned her neck to look up at him, but Durotan continued to gaze into the water as if searching for the answers there. Kashur's
heart sank a little, but immediately she reprimanded herself. If Durotan was not of the shamanic path, then he was not of the
shamanic path. Surely his destiny would be an honorable one regardless, born to lead his clan as he had been.
"My many times great granddaughter," Tal'kraa said with more gentleness than Kashur had ever heard from him before. "You
have brought him, as I asked." Leaning heavily on a staff as insubstantial as he, the spirit of the Grandfather moved in a slow
circle around Durotan as the young orc continued to look into the water. Kashur watched both Frostwolf males closely. Durotan
shivered and looked about, no doubt wondering where the sudden chill came from. Kashur smiled to herself. He could not see his
ancestor's spirit, but he knew, somehow, that Tal'kraa was there.
"You cannot see him," she said a bit sadly,
Durotan's head came up and his nostrils flared. Swiftly, he got to his feet. In the eerie light, his tusks looked blue and his skin had
a green cast to it.
"No, Mother. I cannot. But ... is an ancestor present?"
"Indeed he is," Kashur said. She turned her attention to the ghost. "I did bring him here, as you requested. How do you find him?"
Durotan swallowed hard, but remained standing straight and tall as the spirit circled him thoughtfully.
"I sensed . . . something," Tal'kraa said. "I had thought he would be a shaman, but if he cannot see me now, then he never will. But
although he will not see spirits or summon the elements, he is born to a great destiny. He will be an important asset to the
Frostwolf clan ... indeed, to all his people."
"He will be ... a hero?" Kashur asked, her breath catching. All ores strove to uphold a code of courage and honor, but only a few
were powerful enough to have their names engraved upon the memory of their
descendants. At her words Durotan inhaled swiftly, and she could see the wanting on his face.
"I cannot tell," said Tal'kraa, frowning a little. "Teach him well, Kashur, for one thing is certain: From his line will come
salvation."
In a gesture of tenderness the likes of which Kashur had never seen, Tal'kraa reached out and brushed an insubstantial finger
across Durotan's check, Durotan's eyes went wide and Kashur could see he had to fight the natural instinct to draw back, but
Durotan did not quail beneath the spectral caress.
Then, like mist on a hot day, Tal'kraa was gone. Kashur stumbled a little; she always forgot how the energy of the spirits fed her.
Durotan stepped forward quickly to catch her arm, and she was grateful for his youthful strength.
"Mother, are you all right?" he asked. She gripped his arm and nodded. His first concern was for her, not for what the ancestor
might or might not have said about him. Even as she pondered the words, she decided not to tell Durotan of them. Level-headed
and great-hearted though he was, such a prophecy could corrupt even the truest of orcish hearts.
From his line will come salvation.
"I am all right," she reassured him, "But these bones are no longer young, and the energy of the spirits is powerful,"
"I wish I could have seen him," Durotan said a bit wistfully. "But. .. but I know I felt him." "You did, and that is more than most
are honored with." Kashur said.
"Mother . . . can you tell me what he said? About— about me being a hero?"
He was trying to act calm and mature, but a note of pleading crept in. She did not blame him. All wanted to live on in glorious
memory, through tales told of their adventures. He would not be an orc if he did not share that desire.
"Grandfather Tal'kraa said it was uncertain," she said bluntly. He nodded and hid his disappointment well. That much was all she
had planned to say, but something moved her to add, "You have a destiny to fulfill, Durotan, son of Garad. Be not a fool in battle
and die before you can fulfill it."
He chuckled then. "A fool docs not serve his clan well, and that is what I wish to do."
"Then, future chieftain," said Kashur, chuckling also, "you had best be about finding a mate."
And she laughed out loud as, for the first time on their journey together, Durotan looked completely unnerved.
Five
Upon reflection, so Drek'Tliar tells me, this time in our history was as a perfect day in early summer. We ores had everything we
truly needed: a hospitable world, the ancestors to guide us, the elements to aid us as they saw fit. Food was plentiful, our enemies
were fierce but not invincible, and we were rich with blessings. If the draenei were not necessarily our allies, neither were they
foe. They shared their knowledge and their bounty whenever they were asked; it was we, the orcs,who always held back. And it is
we, the orcs,who would unwittingly be twisted to serve another's end.
Hate is powerful. Hate can be eternal. Hate can be manipulated.
And hate can be created.
In the darkness visible, ageless, timeless, Kil’jaeden dwelt. The power surged and throbbed through him, better than blood now,
more nourishing than meat or drink, heady and calming at the same time. He was not omnipotent, not yet, or else worlds would
fall before him with a thought rather than through battle and destruction, and on the whole, he was content with this.
But they yet lived, die exiles. Kil’jaeden could sense them, though centuries had passed according to those to whom time still
mattered. They were lying low, Velen and die rest of the fools. Too cowardly to face him and Archimonde, who had worked as his
friend and ally through the . . . changes ... as he had when they were simple beings.
He, Archimonde, and the others no longer thought of themselves as "credar." Velen would call them "man'ari," but they called
themselves the Burning Legion. Sargeras's army. The chosen ones.
He extended a scarlet hand, long and elegant and clawed, into the nothingness that was everything and felt it ripple beneath his
inquiry. Scouts had been dispatched the moment the enemy had escaped, scouts who reported nothing but failure. Archimonde
wanted them to die for their lack of success, but Kil’jaeden opted otherwise. Those who feared, fled, he had good cause to know.
Those who sniffed reward and their lord's approval stayed, hungering for it. So while Kil’jaeden made his disapproval known,
those who had failed him usually got a second chance. Or third, if he believed them to be doing all they could and not simply
coasting on his goodwill.
Archimonde disagreed on this obsession that occupied Kil’jaeden.
"There are worlds aplenty to conquer and devour, in service to our master Sargeras," Archimonde rumbled. The blackness glowed
around them as his voice pierced it. "Let the fool go. We would sense it if he used his talents on any level that would pose a threat.
Let him rot on some world, bereft of everything that mattered to him."
Kil’jaeden slowly turned his massive head to regard the other demon lord.
"It is not about rendering him powerless," Kil’jaeden hissed. "It is about destroying him and those foolish enough to have
followed him. It is about crushing him for his lack of faith. For his stubbornness. For his refusal to think about what was best for
all of us."
The large, clawed hand turned into a fist and the sharp nails dug into the palm. Molten fire poured forth, then the flow stopped as
it hit what passed for air, leaving a thick ridge like a scar. Kil’jaeden's body was covered with many such welts; he took pride in
them.
Archimonde was powerful, elegant, smooth, intelligent. But he lacked the burning desire for utter obliteration that Kil’jaeden
nursed. He had explained it time and again, and now simply sighed and opted not to discuss the matter further. For centuries now,
they had had this argument; no doubt they would continue to have it for centuries more ... or until Kil’jaeden succeeded in the
destruction of the being who had once been his closest friend. Perhaps that was it. Kil’jaeden mused with a sudden enlightenment.
Archimonde had never had particular feelings for Velen other than as a fellow leader of the eredar. Kil’jaeden had loved Velen as
a brother, closer than that, loved him almost as another aspect of himself
And then . ..
Again the huge hand clenched, and again unholy fire poured forth in lieu of blood.
No.
It would not be enough to think of Velen sitting on some backwater world, nursing his hurt pride, living off the land in some cave.
Kil’jaeden once would have said he wanted blood. But blood, powerful in its own way as it was, would not satisfy him now. He
wanted the essence of shame, of utter and complete humiliation. That would be even sweeter than the copperytaste of life flowing
from Velen and his stupid followers.
Archimonde tilted his head, a gesture Kil’jaeden recognized. One of his own servants was speaking to him. Archimonde had his
own schemes and machinations, all, like Kil’jaeden's, in service to their dark master and his ultimate conquest. Without a word
Archimonde rose to his full, imposing height and departed, his movements lithe and sleek, belying his size.
At that moment as well, Kil’jaeden felt a slight scratching inside his head. He recognized it as once: it was Talgath, ever his right
hand, seeking contact. And the sensation emanating from the thought was one of cautious hope.
What is it, my friend? Speak! Kil’jaeden commanded in his mind.
My great lord, I do not wish to plant false hope, but. .. I may have found them.
Tempered delight rose inside Kil’jaeden. Like the being he hunted, Talgath was ever the cautious one of his minions. Only a little
lower in rank than Kil’jaeden himself, he had proved his loyalty over the centuries. He would not say even this guarded statement
without good cause.
Where? And what makes you sense this?
There is a small world, primitive and insignificant. And I have sensed their peculiar brand of magic Minting the area. It is
possible that they may have come and gone. Such, alas, has happened before.
Kil’jaeden nodded, even though Talgath was not present to see the gesture. Some things from his past yet lingered, he thought,
smiling a litdc at the ancient movement that betokened agreement in nearly every sentient species he had encountered.
You speak truly, he acknowledged. Many times before, Kil’jaeden's forces had arrived on some world or other, lured by the sweet
essence of eredar magic, only to find that somehow Velen and his wretched followers had gotten wind of the approach and
escaped. But I remain hopeful. I will find them and twist them to my purposes, and I have eternity in wnicJi to do so.
A thought occurred to him. So often before, Kil’jaeden's forces had descended upon a world where Velen was thought to be. only
to have him escape. Kil’jaeden had nursed his insulted pride by destroying such worlds, but the slaughter of primitive races—
though pleasant—did not slake his demonic thirst for complete and total revenge.
He would not behave that way this time. He would not send Talgath at the head of the Burning Legion. Velen had once been the
strongest of them, the wisest, the most attuned to magic and science. Kil’jaeden could not imagine that his old friend would have
dropped his guard, not after such a relatively brief time. Velen would be constantly on the alert, ready to flee in the face of so
obvious a threat.
But... what about a less obvious threat?
Talgath . . . I want you to investigate this world for me.
My lord? Talgath's mental voice was smooth and poised, but puzzled.
We have descended upon worlds in force before, and to no avail. Perhaps this time, only one is sent. One only, but one who can be
trusted completely.
Kil’jaeden sensed unease and pride warring in Talgath's thoughts.
There are more ways to destroy one's enemy than with an army. Sometimes, those ways are better.
You—you wish me to find such a better way, then?
Precisely Visit this place on your own. Learnaboutit. Investigate. Tell me if the exiles are truly there, and if so, what their state is.
Tell me what they live on, if they are fat and settled like tamed livestock or lean and edgy, like prey animals. Tell me what their world is like, what other peoples live there, what creatures, what seasons. Investigate, Talgath. Do
nothing without express orders from me.
Of course, my lord. I shall prepare at once. Still puzzled, but obedient and intelligent. Talgath had served the man'ari master well
in the past. Now he would serve well again.
Kil’jaeden's face, though it little resembled what it had been before he had cast his lot with the great lord Sargeras. was still able to
twist into the facsimile of a smile.
Durotan, like all his people, had been ready to begin training with weapons at the age of six. His body was already tall and filling
out, and the usage of weaponry came naturally to his people. At twelve, he had gone with the hunting parties. And now, after the
rite that marked him as an adult, he had been able to join in the hunt for the ogres and their obscene, twisted masters, the gronn.
This year, as the autumn Kosh'harg came, he joined the adults in the circle after the children had been sent to bed. And as he and
Orgrim had learned years before, being an adult and being able to attend the fireside circle was not very interesting.
However, the one thing he did find interesting, as he watched with observant brown eyes, was interacting with those whose names
he had known for many years, but who never spoke much to him because of his youth. Mother Kashur, of course, was from his
own dan. He knew she had high standing among the shaman of the other clans, and he took pride in that fact. He noticed her
huddled by the fire on this first night, a woven blanket wrapped around a frame that seemed to him little more than bone and skin.
He knew, without knowing how he knew, that this would be her last Kosh'harg celebration, and the thought saddened him more
than he had expected.
Next to her. younger than she but older still than Durotan's parents, was Kashur's apprentice Drek’Thar. Durotan had not spoken
much with Drek’Thar, but the older ore's sharp tongue and sharp eyes were deserving of much respect. Durotan's brown eyes
continued to roam over the assembled company. Tomorrow, the shaman would be gone, departing for their meetings with the
ancestors in the cavern of the sacred mountain. Durotan shivered as he again recalled his visit there, and the cold breeze that felt
like a draft, but was nothing so ordinary.
Over there was Grom Hcllscrcam. the young and slightly manic chieftain of the Warsong clan. Only a few years older than
Durotan and Orgrim, he was new to his position. There had been muttcrings about the mysterious circumstances under which the
former chieftain had died, but the Warsong clan did not challenge Grom's leadership. Durotan thought it no wonder. Though
youthful, Grom was intimidating. The dancing, flickering light of the fire only served to make
him look more menacing. Thick black hair flowed down his back. Upon his ascension to chieftainship, Grom's jaw had been
tattooed a uniform shade of black. Around his neck hung a necklace of bones. Durotan knew their meaning: Among the Warsong,
it was tradition that a young warrior wear the bones of his first kill, inscribed with his personal runes.
Beside Grom was the enormous, imposing Blackhand of the Blackrock clan. Next to Blackhand, munching in silence, was the
chieftain of the Shattered Hand clan, Kargath Bladcfist. In lieu of a hand, he had a scythe embedded in his wrist, and even now as
an adult Durotan found himself unsettled as the blade glinted in the firelight. Next to him was Kilrogg Dcadcyc, chieftain of the
Bleeding Hollow clan. The name was not a familial one. but one he had taken for himself. One eye flitted over the assembled
company; the other sat, mangled and dead in truth, in its socket. If Grom was young for a chieftain, then Kilrogg was old for one.
but it was clear to Durotan that despite his years and grizzled appearance, Kilrogg was far from done with cither life or leadership.
Uneasily Durotan turned his attention elsewhere.
On Drek’Thar's left was the famous Ner’zhul of the Shadowmoon clan. For as long as Durotan could remember, Ner’zhul had led
the shaman. Once. Durotan had been permitted to attend a hunt at which Ner’zhul had been present, and the mastery this shaman
had over his skills was shocking. While others grunted and labored to contact the elements, directing them powerfully but without
grace, Ner’zhul remained tranquil. The earth shook beneath him when he asked it; lightning came from the skies to strike where
he directed. Fire, air, water, earth, and the elusive Spirit of the Wilds all called him companion and friend. He had not seen
Ner’zhul interact with the ancestors, of course; no one but shaman were witness to such things. But it was clear to Durotan that if
the ancestors had not favored Ner’zhul, he would not have serenely carried power all this time.
Ner'zhul's apprentice, however, Durotan did not like. Orgrim was sitting next to his boyhood friend, and, seeing where Durotan's
gaze led, leaned over and whispered, "I think that Gul'dan would better serve his people if he were set out as bait."
Durotan looked away so that no one else would see him smile. He did not know how experienced Gul'dan was as a shaman; surely
he must have some ability or else Ner’zhul would not have taken him on to succeed him. But he was not a very prepossessing ore.
Shorter than many, softer than most, with a shoit, bushy beard, he did not exemplify the orc as a warrior. But Durotan supposed
that one did not have to be a hero to contribute.
"Now that one, she is a warrior born."
Durotan looked in the direction that Orgrim had indicated and his eyes widened slightly. Orgrim had spoken the truth. Standing
tall and straight, her muscles rippling beneath smooth brown skin in the firelight as
she reached and sliced a chunk of meat off the roasting talbuk carcass, the female in question seemed to Durotan to be the epitome
of all the ores valued. She moved with the feral grace of one of the black wolves, and her tusks were small but sharpened to
deadly points. Her long black hair was pulled back in an efficient but attractive braid.
"Who—who is she?" Durotan murmured, his heart already sinking. Surely this magnificent female was a member of another clan.
He would have noticed if such a beauty—strong, supple, graceful—had been in his own clan.
Orgrim guffawed and slapped Durotan on the back. The sound and gesture caused several heads to turn in their direction,
including, Durotan realized, that of the lovely female. Orgrim leaned in to whisper the words that made Durotan's spirits rise.
"You unobservant dog! She is a Frostwolf! I'd have claimed her for myself if she were of my own clan."
A Frostwolf? How in the world had Durotan failed to notice such a treasure in his own clan? He turned his gaze from Orgrim's
grinning visage to look at her again. He found her staring directly at him. Their gazes locked.
"Draka!"
The female started and turned away. Durotan blinked, as if returning to himself.
"Draka," he said quietly. No wonder he had not recognized her. "No, Orgrim. She was not a warrior born. She is a warrior made."
Draka had been born sickly, her skin a pale fawn color rather than the healthy tree-bark brown that marked most ores. For most of
his childhood. Durotan remembered the adults speaking of her in low whispers, as of one already on the way to joining the ancestors. His own parents once spoke of her sadly, wondering what her family had done that the spirits would curse them with such a
frail child.
It was soon after that. Durotan realized, putting the pieces together, that Draka's family had moved to the outskirts of the
encampment. He had not seen much of her, busy as he was with his own duties.
Draka had sliced off several chunks of meat and brought them back to her family. Durotan noticed two younglings sitting with the
ores who presumably were her parents. Both looked fit and healthy. Feeling her gaze upon him. Draka turned her head and met his
eyes steadily. Her nostrils flared and she sat up straightcr. as if daring Durotan to look upon her with pity and compassion rather
than admiration and respect.
No, this one did not need any pity. By the grace of the spirits, the healing of the shaman, and the power of the will he could see
burning in her brown eyes, she had cast off her childhood frailty to mature into this ... this vision of female orc perfection.
His breath escaped him in a whoosh as Orgrim elbowed him. Durotan glared at his childhood friend.
"Stop gaping, it makes me want to put something in your mouth to shut it," Orgrim grumbled.
Durotan realized he had indeed been gaping, and that more than one knowing, grinning glance was coming his way. He returned
his attention to the feast, and did not glance at Draka again for the rest of the night.
But he dreamed of her. And when he awoke, he knew that she would be his. He was heir to the chieftaincy of one of the proudest
of orc clans.
What female could deny him?
"No," Draka said.
Durotan was stunned. He had approached Draka the next morning and invited her to go hunting with him the following day.
Alone. Both knew what that meant; male and female hunting in a pair was a courtship ritual. And she had rebuffed him.
It was so unexpected he did not know how to react. She watched him almost contemptuously, her lips curving around her perfect
tusks in a smirk.
"Why not?" Durotan managed.
"I am not yet of age." she replied. The way she phrased it made it sound more like an excuse than a reason.
But Durotan would not be put off so easily. "I had intended this to be a courting hunt, that much is true," he said bluntly. "But if
you are not of age I will respect that. Still. I would like your company. Let this be a hunt shared by two proud warriors, nothing
more." Now it was her turn to be startled. Durotan guessed that Draka had expected him to cither push the point or leave in anger.
She paused, her eyes wide. Then she grinned. "I will come on such a hunt, Durotan. son of Garad, leader of the Frostwolf clan."
Durotan thought he had never been happier. This was vastly different from the usual hunt. He and Draka had set a brisk, loping
pace. All his challenges with Orgrim had given Durotan stamina, and for a moment he worried that he was going too fast. But
Draka, born so fragile and now so strong, kept up with him. They did not speak much; there was little to say. They were on a hunt,
they would find prey, kill it, and bring it back to their clan. The silence was easy and comfortable.
He slowed as they moved into open territory and began to scan the ground. There was no snow on the earth, so tracking was not
the simple job it was in the winter months. But Durotan knew what to look for: disturbed grass, broken bush twigs, an indentation,
however slight, on the soil.
"Clcfthoovcs," he said. He rose and scanned the horizon in the direction they had gone. Draka still crouched on the earth, her
fingers delicately moving aside the foliage.
"One is injured," she announced.
Durotan turned to her. "I saw no blood."
She shook her head. "No blood, but the pattern of the prints tells me this." She pointed where he had looked. He saw nothing to
alert him to an injured beast and shook his head, puzzled.
"No, no. not this print . . . the next. And the one after that."
She moved along, careful where she placed her feet, and suddenly Durotan saw what she had: The indentations of one hoof were
slightly less deep than the other three.
The beast was limping.
He turned admiring eyes on her, and she flushed slightly. "It is easy to read." she said. "You would have found it yourself."
"No," he admitted honestly. "I did not. I saw the prints, but I did not take the time to observe them in full detail. You did. You will
make an excellent hunter one day."
She straightened and looked at him proudly. Something warm and simultaneously strengthening and weakening rushed through
him. He was not one to pray, but now as he looked at Draka standing before him, he sent a quick prayer to the spirits: Let this
female look agreeably upon me.
They followed the trail like wolves on the scent. Durotan had stopped leading; this female was his equal in tracking. They
complemented one another well. He had the sharper eyes, but she looked more deeply at what he found. He wondered what it
would be like to fight beside her. Their eyes on the earth before them, they loped around a sharp turn. He wondered what it would
be like to—
The great black wolf, crouched snarling over the same animal they had been tracking, whirled. For an endless instant, three
predators regarded one another. But even before the mighty beast had gathered itself to spring, Durotan had charged.
The axe felt as nothing in his arms as he lifted and struck- It sank deep into the creature's torso, but Durotan felt the retaliatory bite
from yellowed teeth crunch down on his arm. Pain, white hot and shocking, coursed through him. He tore his arm free. It was
harder this time to lift the axe with his arm pumping blood, but he did. The wolf had turned its attention fully upon Durotan, its
yellow eyes boring into his, its mouth open in a roar. Its hot breath stank of rancid meat.
At that instant, before the great jaws could close upon his face, Durotan heard a war cry. There was a flurry of movement in the
corner of his eye. Draka sprang upon the beast, her long, ornamented spear preceding her. The wolf's head snapped back as the
spear pierced its midsection. In the instant of inattention, Durotan hefted his axe again and brought it down as hard as he could. He
felt it cut through the animal's body, down, down, striking earth, going deep, lodging so firmly he could not pull it out
immediately.
He stepped back, panting. Draka stood beside him.
He felt her warmth, her energy, her passion for the hunt as powerful as his. Together they stared at the mighty beast they had slain.
They had been taken unawares by an animal that usually required several seasoned ores to bring it down, and they were still alive.
Their foe lay dead, blood pooling beneath it, sliced in two by Durotan's axe, Draka's spear protruding from its heart. Durotan
realized he would never be able to tell which of them had struck the true killing blow, and the thought made him ridiculously
happy.
He sat down hard.
Draka was there, quickly washing the blood from his lacerated arm, only to mutter under her breath as more came. She tended him
with healing salves and tightly wrapped bandages, along with some bitter-tasting herbs she added to the water and ordered him to
drink. After a few moments, the dizziness went away.
"Thank you," he said quietly.
She nodded, not looking at him. Then a smile quirked one corner of her mouth.
"What is so funnv? That I was not able to stand?"
His voice was harsher than he had intended and she looked up quickly, surprised at his tone,
"Not at all. You fought well, Durotan. Many would have dropped their axe after such a blow,"
He felt oddly pleased by her comment, delivered as a factual statement rather than flattery. "Then . . . what amuses vou?" She
grinned, meeting his eyes evenly. "I know something, and you do not know it. But . . . after this ... I think I will tell you."
He felt himself smiling too. "I am honored."
"I told you yesterday that I was not of age for a courtship hunt."
"True."
"Well... when I said that, I knew I would soon come
fir age.
"I sec," he said, though he didn't, not quite. "Well... when will you come of age?"
Her smile broadened. "Today," she said simply.
He looked at her for a long moment, then, with no word, pulled her to him and kissed her.
Talgath had been observing the ores for some time. Now, he withdrew from them, their bestial nature offending him. Being a
man'ari was better. Except for the female creatures with the leathery wings and tail, man'ari slaked their lust with violence, not
coupling. He preferred it that way. He would, in fact, have preferred to have slain the two on the spot, but his master had been
quite clear about intervening. There would be questions asked if these two did not return to their clan, and though they were as
unimportant as flics to him, flics could become a nuisance. Kil’jaeden wanted him only to observe and report back, nothing more.
And so Talgath would.
Revenge, mused Kil’jaeden, like fruit on a tree, was sweetest when allowed to fully ripen. There had been moments over the long
stretch of years when he had harbored doubts about being able to locate the renegade eredar. The more Talgath shared with him,
however, the more confident and delighted Kil’jaeden grew.
Talgath had served him well. He had observed the pathetic, so-called "cities" the once-mighty Velen and his little handful of
eredar had created. He had observed how they lived, hunting like the creatures who called themselves "ores," putting grain in the
ground with their own hands. He had watched them trade with the hulking, barely verbal creatures, treating them with a courtesy
that was positively laughable. Talgath sensed some echoes of former grandeur in their buildings and limited technology, but
overall, Talgath felt that Kil’jaeden would be pleased with how low his former friend had fallen.
"Draenei," they called themselves now. The exiles. And they had named the world Dracnor.
Kil’jaeden realized that Talgath was perplexed when, rather than focusing on Velen himself, Kil’jaeden wanted to know more
about the ores. How were they organized? What were some of their customs? Who were their leaders, and how were they chosen?
What was important to them as a society, as individuals?
But Talgath's job was to report, not to evaluate, and he answered his master to the best of his ability. When at last Kil’jaeden had
learned everything that Talgath had learned, right down to the names of the two beasts rutting after their kill together, he was
satisfied—for the moment at least.
At long last, revenge would be his. Velen and his upstart companions would be punished. But not quickly, not with an army of
enhanced eredar to rend them to pieces of bloody pulp. That would be too merciful. Kil’jaeden wanted them dead, yes. But he
wanted them broken. Humiliated. Crushed as utterly and completely as an insect beneath a booted foot.
And now, he knew exactly how to do it.
SIX
The lessons from that time were bitter, bought with blood and death and torment. But ironically, the thing that nearly destroyed us
was the thing that would redeem us later: a sense of unity. Each clan was loyal to itself, fiercely dedicated to its members, but not
to others. What we united under, and against, was dreadfully wrong and for that, we are atoning stilt Generations after me will
still pay for those mistakes. But the unity itself was glorious. And it is that lesson I wish to recover from the ashes. It is that lesson
that caused me to speak with the leaders of so many seemingly different peoples, to work together toward goals we can all be
proud of.
Unity. Harmony That is the good lesson of the past. I have learned it well.
Ner'zhul looked up into the twilight sky, content. The sunset was brilliant tonight. The ancestors must be pleased, he mused,
taking a small amount of pride in the thought. Another Kosh'harg had come and gone. They seemed to him to come much harder
on each other's heels than they had in the past, and each time the celebration occurred, there was something to rejoice in, and
something to mourn.
His old friend, Kashur—he understood that her clan, the Frostwolves, had addressed her revcrendy as "Mother"—had passed to
the ancestors. From what he had heard, she had died bravely. She had insisted on joining a hunt, something she had not done for
years. The Frostwolves had hunted clcfthoovcs, and the ancient Mother had been in the vanguard of the charging warriors. She
had been trampled to death before anyone could intervene to save her, and Ner’zhul knew that even as her clan mourned her, they
celebrated her life and how she had chosen to depart it. Such was the way of the ores. He wondered if he would see her, and then
chided himself for the thought. He would see her if she saw fit to reveal herself to him. Death was not the vast desert of sorrow to
a shaman that it was to other orcs,for they had the privilege to again be in the presence of the beloved dead, learn their wisdom,
feel their affection.
The Frostwolves had had a double tragedy, for the intervening time between Kosh'hargs had claimed their leader Garad as well.
The Frostwolves had had the misfortune on one deceptively sunny day to stumble across no fewer than three ogres and one of
their monstrous masters. The hideous creatures were stupid but fierce.
and the gronn was a cunning foe. The ores were victorious, but at a grave cost. Despite all the healers could do, Garad and several
others died from their injuries that black day.
But in the sorrow of losing a leader, and one that Ner’zhul had known and respected, was the joy of seeing new blood come into
its own. Kashur had spoken well of young Durotan, and from all Ner’zhul had seen, the youth would make a fine leader. He had
watched as Durotan was named chieftain, and had noticed an attractive, fierce-looking female looking on with more than simple
clan interest in the proceedings. Ner’zhul felt certain that by the next Kosh'harg, the lovely Draka would be the mate of the new
Frostwolf chieftain.
He sighed, sifting through the images in his mind while filling his eyes with the delights of the glorious sunset. The years came
and went, and gave their blessings, and demanded their sacrifices.
He went to his small hut, which he had once shared with a mate who had passed to the ancestors several years ago. Rulkan visited
him from time to time, imparting no words of wisdom, but filling his heart with tenderness and opening him afresh to the needs of
his people each time her spirit brushed his. He missed her rough laughter and her warmth beside him at night, but he was content.
Perhaps, he mused, Rulkan would come to him in a vision tonight.
He prepared a potion, chanting over it softly, then drinking it slowly. It would not actually cause a vision; nothing would unless
the ancestors willed it, and sometimes visions came upon him when he least expected them. But over many long years the shaman
had learned that some herbs opened the mind while one slept, so mat if one was indeed granted the gift of a vision, one would
remember it more clearly the following morning.
Ner’zhul closed his eyes, and then opened them again almost immediately, although he knew he was fast asleep.
They were standing on a mountaintop, he and his beloved Rulkan. At first he thought they were observing the sunset together,
then realized that the sun was rising, not descending into slumber for the night. The sky was glorious, but in a way that roused and
moved him rather than calmed and comforted him. The colors were scarlet and purple and orange, almost violent, and Ner’zhul's
heart lifted.
Rulkan turned to him, smiling, and for the first time since she had exhaled her final breath as a living being, she spoke to him.
"Ner’zhul, my mate, this is a new beginning,"
He gasped, trembling, overcome with love for her, flooded with a simmering excitement roused by the vibrant colors of the
sunrise. A new beginning?
"You have led our people well," she said. "But the time has come to deepen the old ways, take them further, for the good of all."
Something rose inside his mind to nudge at his conscious thought. Rulkan had not been a shaman. She
had not been a chieftain. She had only been her wonderful self, which had been more than enough for Ner’zhul, but she had held
no position in life that would make it likely that she would speak so authoritatively. Annoyed at his lack of faith, Ner’zhul pushed
the voice down. He was not a spirit. He was only flesh and blood and though he understood the spirit ways more than most, he
also knew that there was much he would never understand until he stood with them. Why wouldn't Rulkan speak for the
ancestors?
"I am listening," he said.
She smiled. "I knew you would," she said. "There are dark and dangerous times ahead for the ores. Hitherto, we have only come
together at the Kosh'harg festivals. Such isolation must end if we are to survive as a race.
Rulkan looked into the sunrise, her face thoughtful and shadowed. Ner’zhul ached to hold her, to take her burdens as his own as
he always had in life. But now, he knew he could not touch her, nor force her to speak. So he sat silently, drinking in her beauty,
cars straining for her voice.
"There is upon this world a blight," Rulkan said quietly. "It must be eliminated."
"Say it, and it will be done," Ner’zhul swore fervently. "I will always honor the advice of the ancestors.
She turned to him then, her eyes searching his as the light grew brighter. "When it is eliminated, our people will stand proud and
tall . . . even more than they are now. Power and strength will be ours. This world will be ours. And you . . . you, Ner’zhul, will
lead them."
Something in the way she said the words made Ner’zhul's heart leap. He was already powerful. He was honored, perhaps even
revered, by his own clan, the Shadowmoon dan. He was the leader of all the orcs,in fact if not in name. But now desire stirred in
his heart for more. And fear stirred in him too, dark and unpleasant, but something that must be faced.
"What is this threat that must be eliminated before the ores can claim what is rightfully theirs?"
She told him.
"What docs this mean?" Durotan asked.
He broke his fast with the two people in his clan he trusted most: Draka, his intended, whom he would wed with full ceremony at
the next full moon, and Drek’Thar, the new head shaman of the clan.
Durotan, along with everyone else, had mourned the passing of Mother Kashur. Durotan knew in his bones that she had intended
to die that day, and wished to make a good death. She would be missed, but Drek’Thar had proved himself a worthy successor.
Fighting back his personal grief, he had stepped in as the primary healer of the hunt then and subsequently. Kashur would have
been proud. Now the three sat and ate in the chieftain's tent, where Durotan. chieftain
since his father's death in battle against the gronn and their ogres, now dwelt.
Durotan was referring to the letter that had recently arrived, borne by a long, lean courier on a long, lean black wolf. He again
perused its contents as he ate porridge made from blood and grain.
Unto Durotan, Chieftain of the Frostwolf clan, the shaman Ner'zhul gives greetings. I have been granted visions by the ancestors
that concern us all, as orcs,rather than as individual clan members. I would speak with the leaders of all the clans on the twelfth
day of this moon, as well as every shaman of every clan. You are to come to the foot of the sacred mountain. Meat and drink will
be provided. If you cannot attend, I will take it as a sign that you do not care for the future of our people and act accordingly.
Forgive my brusqueness, but this matter is of the utmost urgency. Please respond via my courier.
Durotan had made the courier wait while he discussed the matter. The courier seemed quite put out, but agreed to stay for a brief
time. The aromatic smell of the porridge, wafting from a large cauldron, perhaps helped convince him.
"I do not know, other than that obviously Ner’zhul feels this is of extreme importance," Drek’Thar admitted. "Such a thing has
never happened outside of the Kosh'harg ceremonies. Always the shaman have a meeting then, in the presence of the ancestors
who wish to attend. But never outside of that. And I have never heard of anyone summoning the chieftains. But I have known
Ner’zhul all my life. He is a wise and great shaman. If the spirits were to speak to any of us about something that threatens us all,
they would speak through him."
Draka growled, "Summoning you like you are pets to come at his call." she muttered. "I mislike this. Durotan. It smacks of
arrogance."
"I do not disagree with you," Durotan said. His hackles had risen at the tone of the letter and at first he had been inclined to refuse.
But as he read it again, he looked past the haughty words to the intent of the letter. Something was definitely troubling the one orc
everyone respected, and surely that was worth a few days' travel.
Draka watched him. her eyes narrowing. He looked at her and smiled.
"I will go, then. And all my shaman."
Draka frowned. "I will come with you."
"I think it would be best if—"
Draka snarled. "I am Draka, daughter of Kclkar, son of Rhakish. I am your intended, soon to be your life partner. You will not
forbid me to accompany you!"
Durotan threw back his head and laughed, warm inside at the display of Draka's spirit. He had chosen well, all right. From one
born weak had come strength and fire. The Frostwolf clan would flourish with her by his side.
"Call in the courier, then, if he has finished his meal," Durotan said, humor still lacing his deep voice. "Tell him that we will come
to this strange meeting of Ner’zhul's, but we had best be assured of its necessity when we are there."
The Frostwolf leader and shaman were among the first to arrive. Ner’zhul himself greeted them, and the moment Durotan laid
eyes on the shaman he knew that he had been right to come. While Ner’zhul was not a young ore, Durotan thought he had aged
years in the few months since the last Kosh'harg. He looked . .. thinner, almost wasted, as if he had not been eating for some
while. And his eyes looked haunted. He grasped Durotan's broad shoulders with hands that trembled, and his thanks were sincere.
This was no arrogant play for power, but a genuine feeling of threat. Durotan inclined his head, then left to see his people settled
in.
Over the next few hours, as the sun sank toward the horizon, Durotan watched a steady stream of ores progress to the flat
mcadowlands at the base of the sacred mountain, almost as if gathering there for the Kosh'harg festival. He saw the bright banners
that announced every clan fluttering in the breeze, and he felt a smile curve his face when he saw the symbol of the Blackrock
clan—Orgrim's clan. Since they had become adults, the two boyhood friends had found their time together limited, and while
Orgrim had attended Durotan's chieftain ceremony, they had not seen one another since, Durotan was pleased but not altogether
surprised to see that Orgrim marched only a step behind Blackhand. the hulking and intimidating leader of the Blackrock clan.
Durotan's old friend was now second in command, then.
Draka followed her future mate's gaze and grunted, also pleased. She got along very well with Orgrim, for which Durotan was
grateful. He was fortunate that the two people who mattered the most to him could be friends with one another.
While Blackhand was speaking with Ner’zhul, Orgrim threw Durotan a glance and a wink. Durotan grinned back. He was
troubled by Ner’zhul's appearance, but at the very least, this gathering would give him a chance to visit with Orgrim. Even as
Durotan had that thought, however, Blackhand turned away with a snort and waved for Orgrim to follow. Durotan felt the smile
on his face ebb; if Blackhand demanded that Orgrim attend him throughout this meeting, then even that pleasure would be denied
him.
Draka, who knew him so well, reached for his hand and squeezed it. She said nothing, she did not have to. Durotan looked down
at her and smiled.
Word came from the same long, lean courier that Ner’zhul would not hold the meeting until tomorrow, as various clans would still
be trickling in through the night. The Frostwolf encampment was smaller than most but more harmonious than many They had
brought traveling tents and furs, and the courier had seen to it that they had been given plenty of meat, fish, and fruit. A haunch of
talbuk now turned slowly over the fire, its tantalizing scent keeping the appetite sharp even as the ores feasted on raw fish. There
were a total of eleven—Durotan, Draka, Drek’Thar, and eight of his shaman. Some of them looked very young to Durotan, but
while shaman certainly could grow in skill over time, once the ancestors had appeared to them in visions they were all accorded
equal honor and respect.
A shadowy form appeared beyond the ring of the fire's illumination. Durotan got to his feet and drew himself to his full imposing
height, just in case the visitor had had too much to drink and had come with belligerent intent. Then the wind shifted and he
laughed as he caught Orgrim's scent.
"Welcome, my old friend," he cried as he went to roughly embrace the other ore. Tall as Durotan was, Orgrim was still bigger, as
he had been in their youth. As he regarded the Blackrock second in command, Durotan privately marveled how he had been able
to best Orgrim in anything.
Orgrim grunted and clapped Durotan on the shoulder. "Your gathering is small, but it smells the best of any of them," he said,
looking at the roasting meat and sniffing appreciatively.
"Then tear off a hunk of talbuk and leave your duties behind for a while," Draka said. "Would that I could," Orgrim sighed, "but I
do not have much time. If the Frostwolf chieftain would walk with me a bit, I would be honored."
"Let us walk, then," Durotan replied.
They left the encampment and walked in silence for a time, until the campfircs were small, twinkling lights in the distance and
they were assured that there were no prying eyes or cars to witness them. Both ores sniffed the wind as well. Orgrim stood silently
for a while, and Durotan waited with the patience of the true hunter.
At last, Orgrim spoke. "Blackhand did not want us to come," he said. "He thought it demeaning, that Ner’zhul would summon us
like we were pets to his call."
"Draka and I had that reaction as well, but I am glad we did. You saw Ner’zhul's face. One look at him was all I needed to
determine that we had been right to come."
Orgrim snorted derisively. "For myself as well, but when I left the camp, Blackhand was still raging against the shaman. He does
not see what you and I do."
It was not Durotan's place to speak ill of another clan leader, but neither was it any secret what most ores thought of Blackhand.
He was certainly a powerful ore, fully in his prime, bigger and stronger than any orc Durotan had ever seen. And he was also certainly not stupid. But there was an air about him that raised Durotan's hackles. Durotan decided to hold his tongue.
"I see your struggle even in the darkness, my old friend," Orgrim said quietly. "You do not have to speak for me to know what you
would say. He is my chieftain, I have sworn loyalty to him and I will not break that oath. But even I have my misgivings."
The admission startled Durotan. "You do?"
Orgrim nodded. "I am torn, Durotan; torn between my loyalties and what my mind and heart tell mc. May you never be put in
such a position. As second, I can help moderate him somewhat, but not much. He is clan leader, and he has the power. I can only
hope that he will listen to others tomorrow and not stubbornly sit on his wounded pride."
Durotan fervently shared that hope. If things were indeed as bad as Ner’zhul's expression seemed to indicate, the last thing he
wanted to see was the leader of one of the most powerful clans behaving like a spoiled child.
His eye fell upon a dark shape on Orgrim's back. Pride and sorrow both flooded him as he spoke. "You carry the Doomhammer
now. I did not know of your father's passing."
"He died bravely and well," Orgrim said. He hesitated, then said, "Do you remember that day long ago when We ran afoul of the
ogre and the draenei saved us?"
"I could never forget it," Durotan said.
"Their prophet spoke of the time when I would receive the Doomhammer," Orgrim said. "I was so excited at the thought of
wielding it in the hunt. That was the first time ! understood—I mean really understood—that the day it became my weapon would
be the day I would be fatherless."
He unstrapped the weapon from his back and hoisted it. It was like watching a dancer. Durotan thought—a balance of power and
grace. The moon shone down upon Orgrim's strong body as he moved, crouched, sprang, swung. Finally, breathing heavily and
sweating, Orgrim replaced the legendary weapon.
"It is a glorious thing." Orgrim said quietly. "A weapon of power. A weapon of prophecy. The pride of my lineage. And I would
shatter it into a thousand pieces with my own hands if it would bring my father back."
Without another word, Orgrim strode back toward the small cluster of twinkling fires. Durotan made no move to follow. He sat
for a long time, staring up at the stars, sensing deep within his soul that the world he would behold upon awakening tomorrow
would be radically different than the one he had known all his life.
SEVEN
I know well that we lost more than we gained, we ores. At that point, our culture was unspoiled, innocent, pure. We were like
children who had always been safe, loved, and protected. But children need to grow up, and we as a people were too easily
manipulated.
There is a place for trust; no one can accuse me of not knowing this. But we must also be careful. Those who have fair faces can
deceive, and even those whom we believe in with all our souls can beguiled.
It is the loss of our innocence that I lament when I think back to what those days must have been like. And it was our innocence
that led to our downfall.
It was a long line of solemn faces that turned to look at die gathered leaders of the orc clans. Durotan stood next to Draka, his arm
about her waist in a protective gesture, although he was not sure why he felt she needed defending. His eyes widened as they met
Drek’Thar's and he saw in his friend and advisor's face something that chilled him to the bone.
He wished he could stand with Orgrim, They were of different clans and different traditions, but other than his intended, there was
no one Durotan trusted more. But Orgrim, of course, stood beside his chieftain Blackhand, who looked around at the gathered
shaman with thinly concealed annoyance.
"He has been too long away from the hunt, that one," Draka murmured, nodding in Blackhand's direction. "He is spoiling for a
fight."
Durotan sighed. "He may well get it. Look at their faces."
"I have never seen Drek’Thar so, not even when Mother Kashur's body was broken," Draka said.
Durotan did not reply, merely nodded and continued to observe.
Ner’zhul strode forward into the center of the gathered crowd. Everyone moved back to give him room. He began to walk sunwise
in a circle, murmuring. Then he paused and lifted his hands. Fire burst forth in front of him, leaping skyward in a display that
brought soft sounds of appreciation even from those who had seen such things many times before. It stood, towering over them for
a long moment, then subsided, settling down to become a traditional bonfire, albeit a magical one.
"As the darkness falls, in more ways than one, sit you beside the fire," Ner’zhul commanded. "Let each clan
sit to itself, with its own shaman, and I will call you forth to speak when the time is right."
"Perhaps you wish us to fetch a slain beast for you, too," came a fierce, angry voice. "And lie obediently at your feet at night!"
Durotan knew that voice; he had heard it raised often enough at the Kosh'harg festivals in his youth, and had heard its owner utter
cries to chill the blood during hunts. It was distinctive and unmistakable. He turned to look at Grom Hcllscream, the youthful
leader of the Warsong clan, and hoped that the outburst would not overly delay whatever it was Ner’zhul had to tell them all.
Hcllscream stood in the front of his clan, more slender man most orcs,but still tall and imposing. The Warsong colors were red
and black, and while Hcllscream wore no armor, the simple learners in those strong hues served to send an imposing message
nonetheless. He folded his arms and glared at Ner’zhul.
Ner’zhul did not rise to the bait, merely sighed deeply. "Many of you feel your honor is offended, this I know. Give me leave to
speak, and you will be glad that you are here. Your children's children will be glad of it."
Hcllscream growled and his eyes flashed, but he said no more. He stood for a moment longer, then with a shrug, as if to indicate
that it was by his own will, he sat. His clan followed his lead.
Ner’zhul waited until there was quiet, and then began to speak. "I have had a vision." he said, "from one of the ancestors whom I
trust more than I can possibly say. She has revealed to me a threat, lurking like a poisonous scorpion under a flowering bush. All
the other shaman can attest to this, and the)
I will, once they have opportunity to speak. It grieves and infuriates me that we have
been so duped."
Durotan hung on the shaman's words, his heart racing. Who was this mysterious enemy? How had so dark a foe escaped their
notice?
Ner’zhul sighed, looking down on the ground, then shook himself. His voice was deep and confident, if laced with sorrow.
"The enemy of which I speak," he said heavily, "is the draenei."
Chaos erupted.
Durotan stared, disbelieving. He looked around, seeking Orgrim's gaze, and stared into his friend's wide, gray eyes, seeing there
the same stunned shock that he himself felt. The draenei? Surely something was wrong. The gronn, yes, perhaps they had
stumbled across some secret knowledge to use against the hated ores .. . but no. Not the draenei.
They were not even fighters on the level that the ores were. They hunted, yes, that was true, but they needed meat as much as any
orc in order to survive. They could stand against the gronn, and sometimes had assisted a hunting party a time or two. Durotan's
thoughts went back to the day when two young ore
children were fleeing before an ogre whose footsteps made the earth tremble, and the tall, blue figures that had appeared out of
nowhere to save them.
Why would they risk themselves to save two boys if they were truly as methodically evil as Ner’zhul believed? It made no sense.
Nothing about any of this made sense.
Ner’zhul was clamoring for silence, and not getting it. Btackhand was on his feet, veins standing out in his thick neck, while
Orgrim was doing what he could to placate his chieftain. Then a terrible noise pierced the air, shattering the cars and almost
stopping the heart. Grom Hcllscrcam stood as well, his head thrown back, his chest thrust forward and his black jaw open so wide
it seemed almost to have unhinged itself like a snake's. Nothing could compete with Hcllscrcam's war cry, and stunned silence
ensued.
Grom opened his eyes and grinned at Ner’zhul, who seemed completely nonplussed at having a former antagonist become an ally
so quickly.
"Let the shaman continue." Hcllscrcam said. So utter was the silence after his outburst that the words were heard by all, even
though they were spoken in a conversational tone. "I want to hear more of this new, old enemy."
Ner’zhul smiled gratefully. "I know this startles you. It shocked me as well. But the ancestors do not lie. These seemingly
benevolent people have been waiting for years until the time is right to attack us. They sit safely behind their strange buildings
made of materials we do not understand, and they harbor secrets that could benefit us greatly."
"But why?" Durotan spoke even before he himself realized he had. Heads turned to look at him, but he did not back down. "Why
do they want to attack us? If they harbor such vast secrets, what do they need from us? And how could we possibly defeat them if
this is true?"
Ner’zhul looked discomfited. "That, I do not know, but I do know that the ancestors are concerned."
"We outnumber them," Blackhand growled.
"Not by that much," Durotan shot back. "Not against their superior knowledge. They came here on a ship that sails between
worlds. Blackhand. Think you they will fall to arrows and axes?"
Blackhand's heavy brows drew together. He opened his mouth to retort.
"This has been simmering like a stew on the fire for many decades," Ner’zhul interrupted, forestalling the argument. "Resolution
and eventual victory will not come overnight. I do not ask you to go to war this moment, but simply to be aware. To prepare. To
discuss with your shaman the right course of action. And to open your minds and hearts to a union that will ensure triumph."
He spread his hands imploringly. "We are separate clans, yes, each with its own traditions and heritage. I am not asking you to
give up that proud history, merely asking you to open your minds to a unity that
takes clans that are strong alone and turns them into an unstoppable force. We are all orcs! Blackrock, Warsong, Thundcrlord,
Dragonmaw . . . don't you see how little those distinctions matter? We are the same people! In the end, we want safe homes for
our young, success in the hunt, mates who love us, honor among the ancestors. We are more alike than different."
Durotan knew this to be true and glanced over at his friend. Orgrim stood behind his chieftain, tall and imposing and solemn. Yet
when he felt Durotan's gaze on him, he met that gaze and nodded.
There had been those who had protested this unusual friendship between two adventuresome and, Durotan had to admit, troubleprone youths. But Durotan would not be who he was today if he had not drawn from Orgrim's steady strength; and he knew in his
bones that Orgrim felt the same about him.
But the draenei...
"May I speak?"
The voice belonged to Drek'Thar, and Durotan turned, surprised. The question seemed to be addressed not only to his chieftain,
but to the shaman who had been a mentor to all of them. Ner’zhul looked at Durotan, who nodded.
"My chieftain," Drek'Thar said, and to Durotan's shock his voice trembled, "my chieftain, what Ner’zhul has said is true. Mother
Kashur confirmed it."
The other Frostwolf shaman nodded. Durotan stared at them. Mother Kashur? If there was anyone Durotan trusted, it was that
wise old ore. His mind went back to the moment when he stood in the cavern, feeling the cold air that was not air on his face,
listening and watching with every fiber of his being as Mother Kashur spoke to someone he could not see but who he knew was
there,
"Mother Kashur said the draenei are our enemies?" he asked, hardly able to believe his cars,
Drek’Thar nodded.
"It is time for the clan chieftains to listen to their own shaman, as Durotan has done," said Ner’zhul. "We will reconvene at
twilight, and the chieftains will tell me their thoughts. These are the people you know and trust. Ask them what they have seen,"
The gathered crowd began to disperse. Slowly, looking at one another cautiously, the Frostwolf clan wandered back to their own
encampment. As one, they sat in a circle and turned their attention to Drek’Thar, who began to speak slowly and carefully.
"The draenei are not our friends," he said. "My chieftain ... I know you and the Doomhammer Blackrock stayed with them one
night, I know that you spoke well of them, I know that it appears that they saved your life. But let me ask you . . . did nothing
strike you amiss?"
Durotan recalled the ogre bearing down on them, bellowing in fury, its club swinging. And with an uncomfortable sensation, he
recalled how very, very quickly the draenei appeared to rescue him and Orgrim. How they could not return home as it was so
conveniently close to twilight.
He frowned. It was an uncharitable thought, and yet...
"Your brow furrows, my chieftain. I take it, then, that your youthful faith in them is now starting to wane?"
Durotan did not answer, nor did he look at his clan's head shaman. He stared down at the earth, not wanting to feel this way, but
unable to stop the doubt from creeping into his heart, like the cold fingers of a frosty morning.
In his memory, he again spoke to Restalaan, telling the tall blue draenei, "We were not as we are now."
"No, you are not," Restalaan had said. "We have watched the ores grow in strength and skill and talent. You have impressed us,"
He felt again a sharp sting, as if the compliment were a carefully crafted insult. As if the draenei thought they were superior .. .
even with their strange, unnatural blue skin, their legs shaped like those of common talbuks, with long, reptilian tails and shiny
blue hooves instead of decent feet like the ores had—
"Speak, my chieftain. What do you recall?"
Durotan told him in a rough and heavy voice of the fortuitous arrival of the draenei, of Restalaan's near arrogance, "And . . . and
Velen, their prophet, asked many questions about us, and he was not making idle conversation. He truly seemed to want to know
about the ores." "Of course he did," Drek’Thar said. "What an opportunity! They have been plotting against us since they arrived.
And to find two—forgive me. Durotan. but two young and naive children to tell them everything they wanted to know? It must
have been quite an event."
The ancestors would not lie to them, especially about something so important. Durotan knew this. And now that he recalled the
events of that day and night in this new light of knowledge, it was obvious how suspicious Velen's actions had been. And yet . . .
was Velen such a master of deceit that the sensation of trust both Orgrim and Durotan had felt had been all a lie?
Durotan bowed his head.
"There is part of me that doubts yet, my friends," he said quietly. "And yet, I cannot stake the future of our people on such thin ice
as my own personal doubts. Ner’zhul did not propose an assault tomorrow. He asked for us to train, and watch, and prepare, and
draw closer as a people. This I will do, for the good of the Frostwolves and the good of the ores."
He looked at each worried face in turn, some merely friends, some, like Drek’Thar and Draka, known and loved.
"The Frostwolf clan will prepare for war."
EIGHT
How easily the mind can be turned to hate from a place of fear—an instinctive, natural, protective response. Instead of focusing
on the things that unite us, we focus on what divides us. My skin is green; yours is pink. I have tusks; you have long ears. Mysfein
is bare;yours is covered with fir. I breathe air; you do not. If we had dung to such things, the Burning Legion would not have been
defeated, for I would never have wished to ally with Jaina Proudmoore, or fight alongside elves. My people would then not have
survived to befriend the tauren, or the forsaken.
So it was with draenei. Our skin was reddish-brown then; theirs was blue. We had feet, they had hooves and a tail. We lived
mostly in the open, they lived in enclosed spaces. We had a fairly short life span; no one knew how long-lived they were.
Nevermind that they had shown us nothing but courtesy and openness. That they had traded with us, taught us, shared whatever
they were asked to share. That had no bearing now. We had heard from the ancestors, and we saw with our own eyes how
different they were.
My prayer, every day, is for wisdom to guide my people. And in that prayer is couched a plea, never to be blinded by such trivial
differences.
The training began. It had always been custom among nearly every clan to begin training the younglings once they celebrated
their sixth year, but previously, the training had been serious but relaxed. Weapons were for hunting animals, not sentient beings
who had their own weapons and skills and technological advantages, and there were plenty of hunters who could easily bring
down prey. A young orc learned at his or her own pace, and there was plenty of time for play and enjoying simply being young.
No longer.
The plea for unity among the ores was answered. The couriers exhausted their beasts riding to and fro between clans carrying
messages. At one point some bright fellow came up with the idea of training bloodhawks to carry the letters. It took some doing
and did not happen overnight, but gradually, Durotan grew used to seeing the scarlet birds fluttering to Drek’Thar and others in
the clan. He approved of the idea; every warm body was needed if battle plans were to be successful.
While spears, arrows, axes, and other weapons worked well against the animals of the fields and
forests, they would need to be supplemented with other types of weapons if they were to be used against the draenei. Protection
would be vital, and whereas before the smiths and lcathcrcraftcrs focused on armor that would blunt attacks from claws and teeth,
now they had to create things that would save the wearer if he were impaled or slashed by a sword. Those who understood the
craft of smithing had been few previously; now, the master smiths found themselves teaching dozens at a time. The forges rang
day and night with the sound of hammers and the hiss of hot metal being plunged into water barrels. Many spent long days
swinging picks, forcing the earth to yield the necessary minerals for crafting weapons and metal armor. Hunts, which had been
conducted as the need arose, now were daily events, as food needed to be dried and preserved and skins were required for armor.
The younglings who lined up for training looked very young indeed to Durotan, who was one of many instructors. He recalled his
father teaching him the ways of axe and spear. What would he think of these small ones, all but buckling beneath shiny metal
armor, holding weapons that no orc had ever before borne?
Draka, with whom he had joined in a quick, quiet ritual as he did not want to take time or resources away from war training,
touched his back gently. Always, she knew what he was thinking.
"It would be better if we had been born in a time of peace," she agreed. "Even the most bloodthirsty knows the truth of that. But
We are where we are, my mate, and I know vou will not shirk this task."
He smiled sadly at her. "Nay, I will not. We are warriors. We thrive on the hunt, on the challenge, on the spilling of blood and the
cries of victory. They are small, but they are not weak. They will learn. They are Frostwolves." He paused, then added fiercely,
"They are ores."
"Time is passing," said Rulkan.
"I know . . . but you would not have our people go into battle unprepared," Ner’zhul replied. "The draenei are vastly superior as it
stands now."
Rulkan grunted unhappily, then smiled. Ner’zhul looked at her. Was it his imagination, or did the smile seem forced?
"We are training as fast as We can," Ner’zhul added quickly, not wishing to offend the spirit who had been his lifematc.
Rulkan was silent. Clearly, it was not fast enough.
"Perhaps you can help us," he said. He was aware that he was babbling. "Perhaps there is knowledge you have that.. . that..."
Rulkan frowned, then cocked her head. "I have told you all I know," she said, "but there are other powers . . . other beings . . . that
the living do not know of."
Ner’zhul almost stumbled at her words. "There are the elements, and there are the ancestral spirits," he managed. "What other
beings are there?"
She smiled at him. "You yet breathe, my mate. You are not ready to treat with them. They are the ones who have been aiding us,
so that We may aid you, the beloved ones We left behind."
"No!" Ner’zhul realized he was pleading, but he could not help it. "Please . . . We need aid if We are to protect the future
generations from the draenei's insidious plots."
He did not say that he was enjoying being the center of attention from every single orc in every single clan. He did not say that her
earlier promise of power had made him think on such things, and begin to desire them. But even more than that, she had instilled
such terror of the monstrous draenei that this sudden holding back on her part unnerved him totally.
Rulkan looked at him appraisingly. "Perhaps you are right," she said. "I will see if they will speak to you. There is one whom t
trust the most, whose concern for our people is deep and abiding. I will ask him."
He nodded, almost ridiculously pleased at her words, then blinked awake. A smile stretched his lips.
Soon. He would see this mysterious spirit, this benefactor, very soon.
Gul'dan smiled at him as he brought in fruit and fish to break his master's fast. 'Another vision, my master?" He bowed low as he
presented the food and cup of steaming herbal tea. Upon Rulkan's advice, Ner’zhul had begun drinking a tincture of certain herbs
brewed to a precise strength. Rulkan assured him that it would continue to ensure that his mind and spirit remained open to
visions. Ner’zhul had found the concoction unpleasant at first, but had showed no sign of his dislike. Now, he found he enjoyed
the beverage first thing in the morning and three more times throughout the day. He accepted the cup and sipped it as he nodded in
response to Gul'dan's question.
"Indeed . . . and I have learned something important. Gul'dan, for as long as there have been orcs,there have been shaman. And the
shaman work with the elements and with the ancestors,"
Gul'dan's face wore an expression of puzzlement. "Yes ... of course ..."
Ner’zhul couldn't stifle a grin that stretched his lips wide over his tusks. "And that is still true. But there is more than we know of.
More that the ancestors can sec, but we as living beings cannot. Rulkan has told me she has been in contact with such beings.
They have wisdom and knowledge even beyond that of the ancestors, and they will come to us to aid us. Rulkan says there is one
in particular who has chosen to take the ores under his wing. And soon . . . soon he will show himself to me!"
Gul'dan's eyes sparkled. 'And ... to me too. perhaps, master?"
Ner’zhul smiled. "You are a strong one, Gul'dan," he said. "I would not have chosen you as my apprentice if that were not the
case. Yes, I think so. When he has deemed you worthy, as he has deemed me."
Gul'dan lowered his head. "May it be so." he said. "I am so honored to serve. This is a time of great glory for the ores. We are
blessed to live to see it."
The Blackrock clan, with Blackhand himself in the vanguard, had begged for the honor of being the first to strike. There had been
some resentment and grumbling, but the hunting skills of the Blackrock were legendary, and they were logical first choice as they
also lived fairly near Telmor. one of the smaller, more isolated cities. They had been given the first efforts at armor, swords,
metal-tipped arrows, and other weapons of war that would bring down the draenei.
Orgrim, the Doomhammer strapped across his back and clad from head to foot in metal that made him chafe and feel confined,
rode at his chieftain's side. The wolf beneath him seemed to have an equal dislike of the heavy armor, and now and then turned his
massive head to snap at Orgrim's leg, as if at some insect that annoyed him. He also seemed to be laboring a bit as he bore his
rider across the soft meadow grass, panting more than usual, pink tongue lolling.
Orgrim muttered under his breath. It had sounded so simple: go to war against this new, insidious foe. But when they had all,
including Orgrim, stood and cheered the decision, no one had stopped to think of how difficult it would be simply to prepare.
They would need to breed the wolves for size even more now, if the animals were to carry armor as well as orc bodies already
heavy with dense bone and powerful muscle.
The weapons were not untried. Several times already they had attacked the ogres, rationalizing that although they were lumbering
and stupid and the draenei were quick and intelligent, fighting them was more akin to fighting the new enemy than killing talbuk
would be. They had lost a few. at first, who were burned on a pyre with due ceremony for their honorable sacrifice. The weapons
felt alien in their hands, the armor slowed them down, but each time, the attacks went more smoothly. The last time, they had
faced not only a pair of ogres but one of their masters, a gronn who had the ferocity of the ogres it dominated and a vile cleverness
that made it a much more challenging foe. Two brave Blackrock soldiers fell before Orgrim got in the final blow, swinging his
hammer of prophecy and bringing doom upon the bellowing gronn.
Blackhand stood beside him, panting and sweating, blood, his own and that of the creature they had just slain, spattering his face.
He wiped his face with his mailed hand and licked the blood, grunting.
"Two ogres and their master," he muttered, reaching out a hand to clap Orgrim on the shoulder. "The pitiful draenei do not stand a
chance against our might!"
Standing sweating in the sun, its bright light glinting off the metal plate and almost blinding his eyes, Orgrim agreed. Bloodlust
rose high in him. He trusted Ner’zhul and the shaman of his clan. Further, he had spoken with Durotan. and they both agreed that
though they had been treated fairly by the draenei on that long-ago day when they had been rescued by the blucskins, there had
been something peculiar about them. The spirits had never guided them falsely before. Why would they do so now?
But as he rode alongside his lord to where a small hunting party had been reported. Orgrim had misgivings. What if the draenei
had been odd? Surely the ores must have seemed odd to them when they first arrived. Was death truly an appropriate punishment
for being different? When had there been a single attack on an orc by the draenei? A single insult or offense, even? Now eighteen
Blackrock warriors, armed to the teeth, their bodies coated in protective metal, were riding to slaughter a group of the blucskins
who were doing nothing more threatening than gathering food for their people. Unexpected and unwanted, an image rose in
Orgrim's mind of the young draenei girl who had smiled shyly at them. Was it her father or mother who would die here on this
gloriously sunny day?
"You look lost in thought Orgrim," said Blackhand in his gravelly voice, startling Orgrim momentarily. "What fills your mind, my
second?"
The face of an orphan, thought Orgrim, but did not say. Instead, he said gruffly, "I was wondering what color draenei blood was."
Blackhand threw back his oversized head and laughed heartily. Orgrim heard a harsh caw and the sound of frantic wingbcats as
the very crows took flight at the noise of the Blackrock chieftain's laughter.
"I will make sure your face is painted in it," Blackhand said, chuckling.
Orgrim's jaw tightened and he said nothing. The ancestors do not lie, he thought grimly. A child is innocent, always, but its
parents have earned death, if they are plotting against us as the spirits have said.
They came upon them with ridiculous ease, not bothering to hide their approach. The scout had said the hunting party numbered
eleven, six males and five females, and they had encountered a herd of cleft-hooves. While the great, shaggy beasts were strong
and difficult to bring down, they did not have the aggressiveness of a roused herd of talbuks, and the draenei hunting party had
already managed to isolate a young bull. It roared, pawing the earth and lowering its head, aiming its single horn at its attackers,
but the outcome was assured.
Or it would have been, had it not been for the arrival of the ores.
Blackhand drew his company to a halt on a ridge. Orgrim could smell the excitement from his kinsmen. Their bodies quivered
with anticipation in their newly crafted armor, their hands clenched and unclenched, wanting to curl about the weapons that were
only now becoming familiar. Blackhand held up a mailed fist, his
small eyes fastened on the activity below, waiting for the right moment to swoop down like a hawk on a meadow rat.
The Blackrock chieftain turned to his shaman, who were in the back. They, too, wore armor, but carried no weapons; they did not
need to. They would heal their brethren as they fell, and also direct the immense power of the elements toward their foe.
"You are ready?" he asked.
The eldest among them nodded. His eyes glowed fiercely and his lips were curved in a smile. He, too, wanted to see draenei blood
shed this day.
Blackhand grunted and brought his fist down. The Blackrock warriors charged.
They uttered their battle cries as they came, and the blucskins turned, startled. At first, only surprise registered on those faces. No
doubt they merely wondered why such a great number of mounted orc warriors were coming to aid them in the kill. It was only
when Blackhand, atop his monstrous wolf, brought his two-handed broadsword down in a smooth blow that severed their leader in
half that the draenei realized that the ores had come not for the clefthoof, but for them.
To their credit, they did not stare in stunned horror at the sight, but sprang immediately into action. Voices that held only the
faintest tremor of fear uttered words in a liquid-sounding, alien tongue. Although Orgrim did not recognize the words—Durotan
had the gift of recall for such things, not he—the sound was familiar. He knew what to expect from that long-ago day when the
draenei had rescued him and Durotan, and had prepared his kinsmen. So when the sky crackled with unnatural blue and silver
lightning, the shaman were ready. They blasted the strange bolts of light with lightning of their own. The brightness was almost
blinding, and Orgrim looked down quickly, his focus on the draenei warrior in front of him wielding a staff that glowed and
sparked. He roared and lifted the Doomhammer over his head and brought it crashing down upon his enemy. The armor the
draenei warrior wore could not withstand such an attack and crumpled like a thin tin bracelet. Blood and brains spattered the
ground.
Orgrim looked up, searching for his next target. Some of the Blackrocks were held in the magical netting created by the draenei's
foul, unnatural lightning. They were proud and strong warriors, but they screamed in agony as the netting burned its way into their
skin. The acrid odor of burning flesh mixed with the reck of blood and fear in Orgrim's nostrils. It was an intoxicating smell.
He felt a wind brush his face, chasing away the scents of battle and infusing his lungs with energy. Orgrim selected the one he
would next kill and raced toward the warrior, a female who had no weapon but who was wreathed in pulsating blue energy.
Orgrim grunted in surprise as the Doomhammer struck die field and bounced off, the shock shivering up the weapon into his arms
and jarring him to the bone. One
of the shaman stepped in, the crackling sound of lightning vying with the mysterious, magical energies of the draenei, and Orgrim
cheered as he saw the good, natural lighting beat back that blue field. He swung again, and this time the Doomhammer crunched
down on the blueskin's skull most satisfactorily.
It was all but over now. Only two remained standing, and in a heartbeat they had fallen beneath a mass of armored brown bodies.
A few more shouts and grunts and the unmistakable sound of bladed weapons sinking into flesh, and then all was silent.
The cornered clefthoof had escaped.
Orgrim caught his breath, his blood singing in his cars, aflame with the excitement of the kill. He had always enjoyed the hunts,
but this ... he had never experienced anything like this. Sometimes the beasts he attacked fought back, but prey such as the
draenei—intelligent, powerful, who fought in the same way he did and not with tooth and claw—was new to him. He threw back
his head and laughed, and wondered if somehow he had become drunk on the sensation.
The cheers and rough, deep bellows of laughter from the victorious ores were the only sound in the glade. Blackhand strode to
Orgrim and embraced him as best he could through the armor they both wore.
"I saw the Doomhammer, but it was so fast it was only a blur to my eyes," the Blackrock chieftain rumbled, grinning. "You fought
well today, Orgrim. I was wise to name you my second." He stooped over the mage that had been Orgrim's last kill and removed
his mailed gloves. The skull had been completely shattered, and blue blood was everywhere. Blackhand dipped his fingers in the
slain draenei's life-fluid and carefully painted Orgrim's face with it. Deep inside, something shifted in the ore. He remembered
doing this himself at his first kill, the blood red and warm; he remembered having this done to him when he went to the sacred
mountain as part of the Om 'riggor ritual, with his father's blood on his face. And now, his leader had anointed him again, with the
blood of the beings that were their enemy.
A bit of the dark blue liquid trickled down his check into the corner of his mouth. Orgrim extended his tongue, tasted the fluid,
and found it sweet.
The bloodhawk settled on its master's arm, its talons digging deep into the protective leather. Ner’zhul paced while the
hawkmastcr unrolled the message and delivered it to him. Quickly, he scanned the small piece of parchment.
So easy. It had been so easy. Not a single casualty, although some had been injured, of course. Their first foray and the ores had
been completely victorious. Blackhand spoke contemptuously of how swiftly they had descended upon the party and broken their
skulls. It was all unfolding as Rulkan had promised him. Surely, surely now the being with whom Rulkan had allied would appear.
The orcs,led by Ner’zhul,
had certainly proven their worth with this decisive triumph.
He again read the missive. Blackhand and the Blackrock ores had indeed been the right choice to send against the draenei. They
were powerful and violent, but unlike the Warsong or some other clans, they were completely under the control of their chieftain.
That night, he had a victory feast prepared for the Shadowmoon clan, and they ate and drank and laughed and sang until at last
Ner’zhul trundled to his bed and fell into a deep, profound sleep.
And the being came.
It was glorious, radiant, so bright that even with his vision-eyes Ner’zhul could not bear to look upon it at first. He fell to his
knees, shaking with the joy and awe that washed through him.
"You have come," he whispered, feeling tears well up in his eyes and slip down his face. "I knew that if we pleased you, you
would come."
"Indeed you have, Ner’zhul, shaman, soul-tender of the ores." The voice rumbled through his bones and Ner’zhul closed his eyes,
almost giddy at the sensation. "I have seen your masterful handling of your people, how you brought disparate clans together with
a common purpose, a glorious goal."
"One that was inspired by you. Great One," murmured Ner’zhul. He thought of Rulkan and briefly wondered why she was no
longer appearing to him, then dismissed the thought of her. This great entity was far superior to even the shade of his beloved
mate. Ner’zhul craved more words from this magnificent being,
"You came to us and revealed the truth." Ner’zhul continued. "We did what was needed."
"You did indeed, and ! am well pleased with you. Glory and honor and sweet victory will continue to be yours if you do as I say."
"Of course I will, but... Great One. this humble petitioner would beg a favor."
Ner’zhul risked a glance up at the being. It was enormous, radiant and red, with a powerful torso and legs that ended in cloven
hooves and curved backward like a talbuk's. ..
... or a draenei's. . . .
Ncrzhul blinked. There was silence for a moment after he voiced his request and he thought he felt a sudden chill. Then the voice
spoke again in his mind and in his cars, and it was still smooth and sweet as honey.
'Ask, and I will decide if you are worthy."
Suddenly Ner’zhul's mouth was dry and the words would not form. With an effort, he spoke. "Great One ... do you have a name
by which we may call youA chuckle rumbled through Ner’zhul's blood. "A simple favor, easily granted. Yes, I have a name. You may call me . , .
Kil’jaeden."
NINE
It is easy to understand why so many of my contemporaries prefer to let this history die. Let it sink into oblivion silently, slipping
beneath the waters of time until the surface of the lake is once again unruffled, and no one knows of the shame lurking in the
depths. I, too, feel that shame, though I was not alive when this occurred. I see it in Drek'Thar'sface as he recounts his part of the
tale in a shaking voice. I saw the weight of it on Orgrim Doomhammer. Grom Helbcream, friend and traitor and friend again, was
ravaged by it.
But to pretend it did not exist is to forget how dreadful the impact was. To make ourselves into victims, rather than claiming our
participation in our own destruction. We chose this path, we ores. We chose it right up until it was too late to turn back. And
having made that choice once, we can, with the knowledge that we have of the end of that dark and shameful road, choose not to
take it.
So I wish to hear the testimony of those who placed one foot in front of the other on a road that spelled near obliteration of our
kind. I want to understand why they took each step, what had to happen for it to seem logical and good and right.
I want to know this so when I see it unfolding again, I will recognize it.
Humatis have two sayings that are wise beyond imagining.
The first is, "Those who do not learn from history are condemned to repeat it."
And the second is . . . "Know your enemy."
Velen was deep in meditation when Restalaan reluctantly approached him. He sat in the central courtyard of the Temple of
Karabor, not on the comfortable benches that flanked the rectangular pool, but on the hard stone. The air was filled with the scent
of the flowering bushes of the lush garden, and the water murmured softly as it circulated. Trees, their leaves moving in the wind,
added their own quiet sounds. It was a tranquil scene, but Velen's attention was inward.
Long, long had the draenei and the Naaru trusted one another. The luminous beings who so seldom opted to take solid form had
been first caretakers of the exiled eredar, then teachers, and then friends. They had traveled together and beheld many worlds.
Each time the Naaru, particularly the one that called itself K’ure, had been instrumental in helping the draenei flee when the
man'ari uncovered their hiding place. And each time, Kil’jaeden and the monstrous creatures who had once been eredar had come
closer
to capturing them. Velen grieved every time he and his people had to depart a world to save themselves, knowing that any beings
they left behind would be as changed as the eredar had been. Kil’jaeden, always eager for more to join the Legion he was creating
for his dark master Sargeras, would overlook no possible recruit.
K’ure, as sorrowful as Velen, grieved with him. But it spoke in Velen's mind with the unalterable logic that Kil’jaeden,
Archimonde, and Sargeras would have destroyed another world in the same amount of time. All worlds, all beings, all races were
horrifically equal in Sargeras's eyes. They all needed to be obliterated in a ghastly festival of carnage and fire, Velen's death at the
hands of beings who had once been his dearest friends would save none of the luckless innocents, whereas his life possibly would
one day.
"How?" Velen had raged once, "How is my life more important, worthier, than theirs?"
The gathering is slow, K’ure had admitted. But it continues. There are other Naaru like me, who are reaching out to the younger
races. When they are ready, they will all be brought together. Sargeras will eventually fall beneath the will of those who yet
believe in what is good and true and harmonious, what is the timeless balance of this universe.
Velen had no choice but to cither believe this being who had become his friend, or turn his back on those who had trusted him and
be twisted into man'ari. He chose to believe. Now, though, he was confused. The ores had begun attacking lone hunting parties.
There seemed to be no reason for the aggression; none of the shaken guards to whom Velen had spoken reported anything out of
the ordinary. And yet, three hunting parties had been killed down to the last draenei. Restalaan, who had investigated the
slaughter, had reported that the bodies were not simply killed ... they were butchered.
So Velen had come to the temple, created in the earliest years of the draenei on this world. Here, surrounded by four of the seven
ata'mal crystals that had sprung into being so very long ago, he could hear the faint voice of his friend in his mind, but as yet,
K’ure had no answers for him.
There would be no flight for them this time if things went wrong. K’ure was dying, trapped in the very vessel that it had provided
when it had crashed into this world two hundred years past.
"Great Prophet," said Restalaan, his voice soft and weary-sounding. "There has been another attack."
Slowly, Velen opened his ancient eyes and regarded his friend sorrowfully. "I know," he said. "I felt it."
Restalaan ran a thick-fingered hand through his black hair. "What do We do? Each attack seems more violent than the last.
Examination of the injuries done to the bodies seems to indicate that they are improving their weapons."
Velen sighed deeply and shook his head. The white braids swung gently with the movement. "I cannot
hear K’ure," he said quietly. "At least, not as well as I used to. I fear its time is not much longer."
Restalaan lowered his gaze, pain evident on his face. The Naaru had effectively sacrificed itself for them; all the draenei knew and
understood this. Strange and mysterious as the being was, the draenei had grown to care for it. It had been trapped and slowly
dying for two centuries. Somehow, Velen had thought it would take longer than that for the being to die ... if it did die, as he
understood such things.
He rose with purpose, his light tan robes fluttering behind him. "It yet has wisdom to impart to me, but I have not the skill to hear
it anymore. I must go to it. Perhaps proximity will help it communicate better."
"You—you mean to go to the ship?" Restalaan asked.
Velen nodded. "I must."
"Great Prophet ... I do not mean to question your wisdom, but—"
"But you do anyway," Velen said, laughing, his startling blue eyes crinkling at the corners with genuine good humor. "Continue,
my old friend. Your questioning always has value to me."
Restalaan sighed. "The ores have adopted the vessel as their sacred mountain," he said.
"I know this," Velen replied.
"Then why antagonize them by venturing there?" Restalaan asked. "They would surely see this as an act of aggression at any time,
particularly now. You would be giving them a reason to continue their attacks against us."
Velen nodded. "I have thought of this. Thought long and hard on it. But perhaps it is time to reveal who we are, and what their
sacred mountain is. They believe their ancestors dwell there; and they may very well be right. If K’ure does not have much longer,
should we not utilize its wisdom and its powers while we can? If anyone or anything can broker peace between the ores and
ourselves, this being, greater far than any of us, has that ability. This may be our only hope. K’ure spoke of finding other races,
other beings, to join in its quest for balance and harmony. To stand against Sargeras and this vast, unholy force he has created."
Velen placed a white hand on his friend's armor-plated shoulder. "One thing for certain has been revealed to me in my
meditations. And that is that things can no longer continue as they used to. orc and draenei can no longer live in distant familiarity
with one another. There's no returning to that, my old friend. There is cither war or peace. They will cither become our allies or
our enemies. And I would never forgive myself if I did not explore every avenue to peace I could. Do you understand now?"
Restalaan searched Velen's face unhappily, then nodded. "Yes. Yes, I suppose I do. But I like it not. At least let me send you with
an armored guard, for I know they will attack before they will listen."
Velen shook his head. "No. No weapons. Nothing to
provoke them. In their hearts, they are honorable beings. I was able to glimpse the souls of the two young orcs who stayed with us
a few years ago. There is nothing cowardly or evil in there, only caution and now, for some reason, fear. They attacked hunting
parties, not civilians."
"Yes," Restalaan shot back. "Parties that were greatly outnumbered."
"We found blood that was not our own spilled at those sites," Velen reminded him. "They took the bodies back for ritual burning,
but there was orcish blood enough on the soil. And with our knowledge, a handful of draenei can easily stand against many ores.
No. I will risk all on this. They will not slay me where I stand, if I state my intentions honorably and I come without the blatant
ability to defend myself."
"I wish I had your confidence, my Prophet," said Restalaan resignedly, bowing deeply. "I will assemble a small escort party, then.
And they will not be armed."
The Great One, Kil’jaeden, began to visit Ner’zhul with more frequency. First it was only in the dream state, as with the ancestors.
He would come in the night while Ner’zhul slept deeply, his body heavy with the drug that opened his mind to Kil’jaeden's voice,
and whisper his praise and congratulations and plans for further orc victory.
Ner’zhul was in ecstasy. Each letter that arrived by bloodhawk from the various clans was read with eagerness and delight. We
came across two scouts far from aid, the Shattered Hand clan chieftain wrote. It was ease itself to dispatch them, outnumbered as
they were.
The Bleeding Hollow clan is proud to report to the great Ner’zhul that we have obeyed him in all things, said another letter. We
have joined with the Laughing Skull clan, more than doubling the number of armed warriors to send against this devious foe. It is
our understanding that the Thunderlord clan seeks allies. We will send a courier to them tomorrow.
"Yes." smiled Kil’jaeden. "Do you see how they are coming together in a just cause? Before, these clans would be challenging one
another if they crossed paths. Now. they are sharing knowledge, sharing resources, working as one to overcome a foe who would
see you all destroyed."
Ner’zhul nodded, but he felt a sudden pang. It had been glorious to finally behold this beautiful, powerful entity, despite the fact
that he looked so much like the hated draenei, but ... he had stopped seeing Rulkan. He found he missed her. He wondered why
she was no longer seeking him out.
Hesitantly, he spoke. "Rulkan—"
"Rulkan has done her part in bringing you to me, Ner’zhul." soothed Kil’jaeden. "You know she is well and happy—you have
seen her. We do not need her as an intermediary anymore. Not now that I have been convinced of your worthiness to be my voice
among your people."
And as before, Ner’zhul's heart flooded with joy. But this time, despite the comforting and exciting words of Kil’jaeden, he felt a
sad little jerk in his heart as it beat, and still wished he could speak with his mate.
Ner’zhul was deep in thought when Gul'dan brought the missive to him. The apprentice bowed and handed his master a piece of
parchment, stiff with blue liquid.
"What is this?" Ner’zhul asked, taking the parchment.
"It was taken off a draenei approaching from the south," Gul'dan replied.
"A party?"
"A single courier. No arms, not even a mount. The fool was walking." Gul'dan's lips twisted into a smile and he chuckled.
Ner’zhul looked down at the parchment, realizing now that the blue stains were the courier's blood. What had possessed the idiot,
walking alone, unarmed, into the heart of Shadowmoon territory?
He unfolded it carefully, trying not to tear it. and quickly began to read. Even as his brown eyes darted over the words, the room
was suddenly filled with radiance and both shaman prostrated themselves.
"Read it aloud, great Ner’zhul," came Kil’jaeden's smooth voice. "Share it with me and your loyal apprentice."
"Yes. please, my master," said Gul'dan eagerly.
As he read it, for the first time since he had spoken with his beloved Rulkan, Ner’zhul tasted doubt- Unto Ner'zhul, Shaman, of the
Shadowmoon clan, the Prophet Velen of the draenei sends greetings.
Recently, many of our people have come under attack from the ores. I do not understand wiry this is. For generations, your people
and mine have lived in peace and tolerance, a state that has benefitted us both. We have never lifted a weapon toward an ore, and
indeed, once we were instrumental in saving the lives of two young ones who unwittingly placed themselves in danger.
"Ah," Gul'dan interrupted. "I remember . . . Durotan. who is currently the Frostwolf chieftain, and Orgrim Doomhammer."
Ner'zhul nodded absently, his thoughts distracted for a moment, then resumed reading.
We can only assume there is a terrible misunderstanding, and wish to speak with you so that no more lives—ore or draenei—are
lost in such a tragic fashion.
It is my understanding that the mountain you call Oshu'gun is sacred to your people, that this is where the wise spirits of your
ancestors dwell. While this place has long had deep meaning for the draenei as well, we have always respected your decision to
claim it as your holy site. However, the time has come for us to recognize that there is more that we share than that divides us. I
am called the Prophet among my people,
because at times I am granted wisdom and insight. I seek to lead well and peacefully, as I am sure you and the leaders of the
various clans do your own people.
Let us meet peaceably, at the place that holds so much meaning for both our races. On the third day of the fifth month, I and a
small party will be moving in pilgrimage to enter the heart of the mountain. No one in the group will bear arms. I invite you and
any others who feel so moved to join me, as we enter the deep place of magic and power, and ask the wisdom of beings much
wiser than we how we can heal this rift between us.
In Light and blessings, I bid you peace.
Gul'dan was the first to speak. Or. more accurately, to laugh.
"Such arrogance! My lord, great Kil’jaeden, this is an opportunity not to be missed. Their leader comes like a clefthoof calf to the
slaughter, unarmed and stupidly thinking that we know nothing of his evil intentions. And he thinks to violate Oshu'gun! He will
die before he sets a vile blue hoof upon even the root of our holy mountain!"
"What you say pleases me, Gul'dan," Kil’jaeden rumbled in that smooth-as-water voice. "Ner'zhul, your apprentice speaks
wisdom."
But Ner'zhul found words stuck in his throat. He opened his mouth twice to speak, and finally words rasped forth on the third
attempt. "I do not disagree that the draenei are dangerous," he said haltingly, "But. . . we are not gronn, to kill unarmed foes."
"The courier was slain," Gul’dan pointed out. "He was unarmed and even unmounted."
"And I regret that!" Ner’zhul snapped. "He should have been taken into custody and brought to me at once, not killed!"
Kil’jaeden said nothing. The scarlet radiance bathed Ner’zhul as he continued, groping his way to a solution.
"He will not be permitted to defile our sacred place," the shaman continued. "Have no worries about that, Gul’dan. But I will not
have him killed without having the chance to speak to him. Who knows but that we might learn something."
"Yes," said Kil’jaeden, his voice rich and warm. "When one is in pain, one will reveal all he knows."
The words starded Ner’zhul, but he did not reveal his surprise. This magnificent being wanted him to torture Velen? Something
inside him was excited at the prospect. But something else inside him recoiled. Not yet. He would not do such a thing yet.
"We will be waiting for him," he assured both his great lord and his apprentice. "He will not escape."
"Lord," said Gul’dan slowly, "a suggestion, if I may?"
"What is it?"
"The closest clan to the mountain is the Frostwolf clan," Gul’dan pointed out. "Let us have them take
Velen and his party and bring diem to us. Their leader once tasted draenei hospitality. And although he has not hindered our
efforts, I do not recall hearing that he has led any attacks against the draenei. We shall kill two birds with one stone: take the
draenei leader captive, and make Durotan of the Frostwolves prove his loyalty to our cause."
Ner’zhul felt two pairs of eyes boring into his—die small, dark ones of his apprentice, and the glowing orbs of his master
Kil’jaeden. What Gul’dan had suggested sounded like wisdom. Then why was Ner’zhul so reluctant to agree?
The heartbeats ticked away and perspiration sprouted on Ner’zhul's low brow. Finally, he spoke, and was relieved to hear his
voice sounded sure and strong.
"Agreed. It is a good plan. Find me pen and parchment, and I shall notify Durotan as to his duty."
TEN
I have never been so proud of my father as when Drek'Thar told me of this incident. I have good cause to know how hard it is to
make the right decision at times. He had much to lose and nothing to gain by making the choices he did.
No, that is not right.
He retained his honor. And there can be no price high enough to sacrifice that.
The letter brooked no disagreement. Durotan stared at it, and then with a deep sigh passed it to his mate. Draka read it quickly, her
eyes darting over the words, and growled soft and low in her throat.
"Ner’zhul is cowardly, to lay this at your feet," she said softly, so as not to be overheard by the courier who waited outside. "The
request comes to him, not you."
"I have promised to obey." Durotan said, his voice equally soft, "Ner’zhul speaks for the ancestors."
Draka cocked her head thoughtfully. A stray beam of sunlight penetrating the tent from a gap in the scams caught her face,
throwing her strong jaw and high cheekbones into sharp relief. Durotan's breath caught in his throat as he looked at his beloved.
For ail the chaos—madness, even—that seemed to have suddenly descended upon himself and his people, he was grateful for her.
He touched her brown face lightly with a sharp-clawed finger, and she smiled briefly
"My mate ... I do not know that I trust Ner’zhul," she said, her voice barely above a whisper.
He nodded. "But we both trust Drek'Thar, and he has confirmed what Ner’zhul has said. The draenei have been plotting against
us. Ner’zhul says that Velen has even insisted on entering Oshu'gun."
Again, the chieftain of the Frostwolf clan regarded the letter. "I am pleased that Ner’zhul has not asked me to slay Velen. Perhaps,
once we have him in our power, we can convince him to change his ways, have him explain why they are so bent on harming us.
Perhaps we can negotiate a peace."
The thought seized his heart and squeezed it hard. As glorious as his life with Draka was. as proud as he was of his clan, how
much happier would he be simply doing as his father had done—hunting the beasts of the woods and fields, dancing in the
moonlight at Kosh'harg festivals, listening to the old tales and basking in the loving warmth of the ancestors. He had not said
anything to Draka, but he was secretly glad that they had not yet conceived a child. This was not a time that was easy on the
young ores. Their childhood had been stolen from them; adult duties had been placed on shoulders still not quite broad enough to
bear them. If Draka were to bear a child. Durotan would not hesitate to have his son or daughter trained as other children were. He
would ask nothing of other parents that he would not do himself, but he was glad that he was not faced with that decision quite
yet.
Draka watched him with intense, narrowed eyes. It was as if she could read his thoughts.
"You have met Velen before," she said. "I watched you try to reconcile your memories of that encounter with the news that they
were trying to destroy us all. It was not easy for you."
"Nor is it now," he replied. "Perhaps it is just as well that I am assigned this task. Velen will remember that night, of that I am
certain. He may be willing to treat with me, whereas he might not be so willing to treat with Ner’zhul. I wish I had seen the letter
he had sent."
Draka sighed and got to her feet. "I think that would have been most enlightening," she said.
Durotan emulated her. "I will tell the courier that his master may rest content. I will not shirk my duty."
He felt her worried gaze boring into his back as he left.
Velen held the violet crystal close to his heart. The red and yellow ones rested at his side as he sat in meditation, casting a soft
glow upon his alabaster skin. The four others were placed elsewhere in draenei territory, their great powers serving his people as
needed. But the violet one never left him.
Its power opened the mind and spirit, and in a way, it was almost like being in direct communication with the Naaru. Velen
always felt stronger, cleaner, his soul honed to a keen edge, when he meditated with the violet crystal. Although each of the seven
crystals was precious and powerful, this was the one he treasured the most.
He strained to hear the soft whispers of K’ure. but he could not. Velen's heart ached. He bowed his head.
He heard voices and opened his eyes. Restalaan was speaking to one of the acolytes, and Velen waved him forward.
"What news, old friend?" Velen inquired. He indicated a pot of hot herbal tea.
Restalaan waved his hand, declining the offer. "Good and bad. my Prophet," he said. "I deeply regret to inform you that the
courier you sent to the shaman leader Ner’zhul was killed by a group of ores."
Velen closed his eyes. The violet crystal grew warmer for a moment, as if trying to offer comfort.
"I sensed his death," Velen said heavily. "But I had hoped it was an accident. You are certain he was murdered?"
"Ner’zhul says so. and offers no apology." Restalaan's voice conveyed his anger and affront at the incident. He was kneeling
beside Velen, next to the red crystal. Velen's dark blue eyes darted to the crystal as it pulsed once, briefly, responding to
Restalaan's emotions.
"So much for your theory that they would not attack an unarmed man," Restalaan continued bitterly.
"I had so hoped for better," Velen said quietly. "But you said there was some good news to mitigate these sad tidings?"
Restalaan grimaced. "If you can call it that. Ner’zhul says that an orc contingency will meet with us at the base of the mountain."
"He ... is not coming?"
Restalaan dropped his gaze and shook his head. "No, my Prophet," he said quietly.
"Who docs he send in his stead?"
"The letter docs not say."
"Give it to me." Velen stretched out a white hand and Restalaan placed the parchment in his palm. Velen uncurled the parchment
and read the letter quickly.
Your courier is dead. It is fortunate that those who slew him thought to search the body for his missive. I have read it, and I will
agree to send a contingency of ores to speak with you. I guarantee nothing—not your safety, not a truce, nothing. But we will hear
you out.
Velen sighed deeply. This was not the response his soul had longed for. What had happened to the ores?
Why in this world or any other were they suddenly so bent on harming the draenei, who had never opposed them in any fashion?
I guarantee nothing, Ner’zhul had said, writing in a strong, bold hand.
"Very well," said Velen quietly. "Then nothing is guaranteed," He smiled at Restalaan. "Rather like life."
The day was inappropriately bright and cheerful, Durotan thought, squinting against the bright early summer light that danced
down. Surely, on a day when his soul felt so bleak and unhappy, the weather ought to reflect it. Clouds, at the very least. More
appropriately, a cold, drizzling rain. But the sun did not care about an ore's heavy hcait, or even the fate of an entire race of
people. It shone down as merrily as if all was right every place its rays touched. Oshu'gun almost seemed to be on fire, so bright
was the light that reflected off its multifaceted, crystalline surface.
Durotan had chosen a position of strength. From where he had positioned his warriors, he would be able to see Velen's traveling
party long before they spotted the ores. He had decided to wait and let the Prophet of the draenei come directly to him, although
he had strategically positioned his warriors so that if the draenei attempted to flee, no avenue of flight would be open to them. And
all the ores who waited patiently on this offensively glorious day were armed to the teeth, with shaman at the ready. With her
sharp eyes and superb fighting skills, Draka was highly useful to him as a scout. He had positioned her as one of the lookouts in
the first group of warriors. The instant that Velen was visible, she would send word to her mate via a spell cast by Drek’Thar.
Drek’Thar himself, though, was standing beside Durotan, As the most powerful shaman in the clan, his place was to protect the
clan's leader. The two stood on a rock outcropping just above the entrance to the gleaming sacred mountain. Dozens of warriors
waited with arrows, hand axes, and javelins at the ready. Others had spent days maneuvering large boulders into position. At a
word from Durotan, a simple movement would send death in the form of huge stones crashing down upon the draenei.
The threat of death, in fact, was everywhere on this lovely mountain, on this beautiful sunny day.
A breeze stirred Durotan's black hair and a bird sang brightly. Drek’Thar looked at his chieftain with concern.
"My chieftain, you are doing what you have been told to do," Drek’Thar said earnestly. "These beings are our enemies."
Durotan nodded and wished he could believe it as easily as every other orc seemed to.
The breeze brushed his check again, more insistently, and this time he heard words on the wind. Draka's message, borne to him by
Drek’Thar's bond with the elements. They are coming. Five of them. None of
them is wearing armor or carries any visible weapons. They walk serenely.
The wind wafted her words away, and he knew it went to touch the cars of all the ores assembled. When the time was right,
Drek’Thar would harness the wind to give orders to Durotan's troops. Durotan straightened, and his heart beat more swiftly. His
hand gripped his battle-axe tightly.
"There they are," said Drek’Thar grimly. Durotan followed his gaze.
Draka's report had been accurate, right down to her interpretation of the manner in which the draenei approached. The five draenei
did not wear the strange blue and silvery armor that Durotan remembered from his single encounter with them. They were dressed
instead as they had been for the meal, in robes of beautiful hues that caught the breeze and fluttered behind them like banners.
Walking at the very front of the little group was Prophet Velen himself. He was unmistakable; his simple tan robes contrasted with
those of his entourage, and of course his strange white skin was unique. Durotan grinned a little despite the dircness of the
situation. The draenei were so garishly clad that only a blind orc would have failed to spot them from a great distance.
The smile faded at what that had to represent. They wanted to be spotted immediately. They wanted the ores to be confident that
they carried no weapons and were on what Mother Kashur would have called a pilgrimage. Or was it all just an elaborate trick?
Shaman needed no spears to destroy. Neither did the draenei. Durotan remembered the magical nets that scared and blackened
flesh on contact—nets of energy, alien to the orcs, that had come from nowhere.
No, even unarmed, the draenei were far from harmless.
He had briefed his warriors and knew they would obey. They understood they were not to fire a warning shot—not to utter even
an insult—without Durotan's express command. But they knew how the draenei fought, and would not be taken unawares.
Durotan could smell the tension emanating from those warriors closest to him; he wondered if the draenei could, too.
Durotan watched as the groups he had set farthest away came out of hiding to close ranks behind the draenei. They were far
enough back so that Durotan hoped the draenei would not notice. If they did, they gave no sign, but merely continued with that
steady, confident... serene . . . pace.
Durotan and Drek’Thar made no attempt to disguise themselves. After several long minutes, Velen lifted his head and looked up,
right into Durotan's eyes. Durotan did not break the gaze, but stood waiting for his enemies to continue their approach. They
reached the base of the mountain, but before they could continue farther, dozens of ores moved purposefully out of hiding to
surround them.
Velen did not look in the least bit surprised. He glanced around, smiling a little, and then returned his gaze to Durotan. Slowly,
Durotan descended until he stood face-to-face with the draenei prophet.
"Long has it been since you and I last stood so, Velen," Durotan said in a calm voice. He deliberately did not use the draenei's
title.
"Long indeed, Durotan, son of Garad, chieftain of the Frostwolf clan," Velen said in that rich, smooth voice that Durotan
remembered. "Are you friends with Orgrim still?"
"Indeed I am," Durotan replied. "He carries the Doomhammer now, and is second in his own clan."
Sorrow flitted across the pale face, a sorrow that was deep and unquestionably genuine. Again, Durotan remembered that night so
long ago, when this being had sat with them and talked of orcish ways, of the Doomhammer and the cost at which Orgrim would
buy it.
"I hope his father and yours passed with great honor," Velen said.
"We are not here today to speak of the past," Durotan said, more forcefully than he intended. He did not like to remember that
night. "We are here because you have informed us that you dare trespass on our most sacred place."
There it is, then, he thought. Let us not mince words.
Velen held Durotan's gaze and nodded. "I had sent a missive to Ner’zhul, not to you, Durotan. He has dcclincd to meet with mc. I
wonder . . . did he share this missive with you?"
"There was no need for me to read it." Durotan replied, "I was asked to come in his stead. And I have done so."
Durotan saw the broad shoulders slump a little. Velen sighed deeply. "I sec," he said. "He may not have told you why I wished to
come today."
"I do not need to know your purpose, draenei," Durotan said.
"But you do. or else this conversation will be for nothing." The voice was clear and crisp, and there was nothing old or frail about
it despite Velen's obviously ancient age. Durotan raised an eyebrow. That Velen was a wise elder was immediately apparent. But
now, for the first time. Durotan caught a glimpse of the sheer strength of will that had buoyed Velen for coundess years.
"This this mountain is sacred to your people. We know this, and we have respected it. But it is also sacred to us." Velen took a
step forward, his gaze locked on Durotan's. The orc warriors around him shifted, murmured, but otherwise did not move.
"Deep inside the mountain is a being that has long cared for the draenei people," Velen continued. "It is older by far than anything
cither of our minds can grasp. And more powerful. But even old and powerful things can die, and it is dying now. There is
wisdom and grace and reconciliation We can have from it. your people and mine. We—"
"Blasphemer!"
Durotan started. The bitter cry had sprung from the throat not of some short-tempered warrior in the crowd, but from the orc who
stood beside him. Drek’Thar's eyes were wide and his body trembled with outrage. Veins stood out on his neck and he shook his
fist at Velen. Durotan was so shocked by the outburst that he did not silence it as quickly as he should have, and Drek’Thar
continued.
"Oshu'gun belongs to us! It is the home of the beloved dead, cradlcr of their spirits, and your hideous cloven feet are not fit to take
one step up its blessed sides!"
Velen. too. seemed surprised at the outburst. He turned his attention to the shaman and stretched out a hand imploringly.
"Your sprits are housed within these walls, it is true, and I would never say it was not so." Velen cried. "But they are drawn there
because of this being. It seeks to—"
It was exactly the wrong thing to say. Drek’Thar bellowed in outrage. Other cries went up, and before Durotan realized quite what
was happening, he saw his warriors surge forward. Draka moved toward them, trying to stop the attack, but she might as well have
been trying to hold back the incoming tide. Durotan spun and struck Drek’Thar hard across the face. The shaman whirled,
snarling. "Protect them!" Durotan cried. "You will obey my orders, and we must take them alive. Protect them, curse you!"
Drek’Thar's eyes flashed in fury, but only for an instant. He lifted his hands and closed his eyes, and suddenly a huge circle of
flame sprang up around the five draenei. A wind sprang up, whipping the fire even higher and physically buffeting the ores. The
warriors stepped back, and to Durotan's horror some of the archers began nocking arrows on their bowstrings.
"Hold!" bellowed Durotan, the wind taking his order and bearing it to his warriors' cars. "I will slay anyone who fires!"
Between his command and Drek’Thar's powerful, if reluctant, abilities, the draenei were unharmed. Durotan raced down the
mountainside to his prisoners, for such they now were. Drek’Thar was at his heels.
"Dismiss fire," Durotan told Drek’Thar. At once, the sheets of flame that almost singed Durotan's eyebrows dissipated. He stood
face-to-face now with Velen, and a wave of an emotion he could not properly name rose inside him as he realized that the draenei
elder was still as calm and serene as he had been when they had simply been talking.
"Velen, you and your people are now prisoners of the Frostwolf clan," Durotan said in a soft, dangerous voice.
Velen smiled, sweetly, sadly. "I expected nothing less." he said.
He and the other four somehow maintained their composure while Durotan ordered them stripped and searched. Their glorious
robes were taken and given to Durotan's top warriors, and the draenei were clad now in sweat-stiff tunics. His stomach turned at
the jeers, insults, and spits that came their way at the humiliation, but he did not stop it. As long as no physical harm came to the
prisoners—and Durotan watched closely to ensure that none would—he would let his warriors have their sport. Beside him, Draka
looked angry at the behavior of her fellow Frostwolves and whispered, "My mate, can you not silence them?"
He shook his head. "I want to see how the draenei react. And . . . the warriors have stayed their hands when they might have been
expected to kill. I will not silence their tongues as well."
Draka looked at him searchingly, then nodded and withdrew. He knew she did not approve, and he did not like what he was
seeing cither. But he was walking a delicate line, and he knew it.
"My chieftain!" cried Rokkar, Durotan's second in command. "Come see what they have brought us!"
Durotan went to Rokkar's side and peered into the sack he had opened. His eyes widened. Nestled inside, swathed in soft fabric,
were two exquisitely beautiful stones. One was red, the other was yellow. Durotan ached to touch them, but did not. He looked up
and met Velen's gaze. "Long ago, Restalaan showed us a crystal similar to this one," he said. "That one protected a city. What do
these do?"
"Each has its own strength. They are part of our legacy. They were bequeathed to us by the being that dwells in the sacred
mountain."
Durotan growled softly. "You would do well not to mention that again," he said. To Rokkar, he said, "Feed them, bind their hands,
and put them on wolves, with shaman to guard them. Give the stones to Drek’Thar. We will take the draenei back with us and
deliver them to Ner’zhul. He should have been here in my stead today."
He turned and stalked off, not wanting to look at Velen's odd, glowing blue eyes, not wanting to see the disapproval in Draka's.
During the long ride back, Durotan wrestled with his emotions. On the one hand, he shared Drek’Thar's offense. Oshu'gun was
sacred to the ores. The idea that something other than the ancestors dwelt inside it, indeed, as Velen claimed, was so powerful that
it lured the ancestors to it, struck him to the core. He could only imagine how the shaman felt about such a declaration. Everything
seemed to point to Ner’zhul's being correct, that the draenei were a blight upon the world and should be eliminated.
What nagged at him was why. He would get an answer to that question tonight.
With everyone, including the five captives, mounted, they made good time. The sun was only starting to set when they returned.
Durotan had sent outriders ahead with the good news, and the clan was waiting eagerly for their arrival. On his right were
Drek’Thar and Rokkar, who shared the sentiments of the Frostwolves. On his left was Draka, who had been uncharacteristically
silent throughout the entire event. Durotan knew that he did not want to hear what she had to say; he was already being pulled in
too many directions as it was.
The prisoners were ungraciously shoved into two tents and an immediate guard was set up around them. Four seasoned warriors
and Drek’Thar's most trusted shaman stood proudly, pleased with the duty entrusted to them. Durotan had ordered Velen isolated;
he wanted to speak with the draenei prophet alone.
After the excitement had settled down somewhat, Durotan took a deep breath. He was not looking forward to this conversation,
but it had to be done. He nodded to the guards and entered the small tent that hosted Prophet Velen.
Since he had ordered Velen bound, he expected to see the elder with his hands tied. Instead, he saw that whoever had carried out
his order had done so with excessive zeal.
The tent had been erected around a sturdy tree, and Velen was now bound to the trunk. His arms had been yanked back at an
awkward angle, the ropes around the white flesh of his wrists tied so tightly that even in the dim light of twilight Durotan could
see that they were turning a darker shade. A rope tied, thankfully loosely, around his neck forced him to keep his head up or risk
choking. A diity cloth had been shoved in his mouth. He was on his knees, and his hooves, too, were bound behind him.
Durotan uttered a deep oath and drew a dagger. Velen gazed at him with no sign of fear in those deep blue eyes, but Durotan did
notice that the draenei looked surprised when the orc used the weapon to cut the bonds rather than his throat. Velen made no
sound, but a flicker of pain passed over his ghostly white face as blood returned to his limbs.
"I told them to bind you, not truss you up like a talbuk," Durotan muttered.
"Your people are very eager, it would seem."
Durotan passed the elder a watcrskin and watched him closely while he drank. Sitting before him in filthy clothing, gulping at
tepid water, his white flesh raw from the bonds, Velen did not look like much of a threat. How would he feel, he wondered, if he
had gotten word of the draenei treating Mother Kashur so? Everything about this felt wrong. Yet Mother Kashur herself had
assured Drek’Thar that the draenei were a threat so dire as to be almost unimaginable.
There was a bowl of cold blood porridge on the ground. With his right foot, Durotan shoved it toward the prisoner. Velen eyed it,
but did not cat.
"Not quite the feast you served Orgrim and me when we dined in Telmor," Durotan said. "But it is nourishing."
Velen's lips curved in a smile. "That was a memorable evening."
"Did you get what you wanted from us that night?" Durotan demanded. He was angry, but not with Velen. He was angry that it
had come to this, that one who had shown him nothing but courtesy was now his captive. And so he took it out on the Prophet.
"I do not understand. We merely wished to be good hosts to two adventuresome boys."
Durotan got to his feet and kicked over the bowl. Congealed porridge oozed onto the earth. "Do you expect me to believe this?"
Velen did not rise to the bait. He replied calmly, "It is the truth. It is your choice as to whether you believe it."
Durotan dropped to his knees and shoved his face into Velen's. "Why are you trying to destroy us? What have we ever done to
you?"
"I might ask you the same question," said Velen. A flush had come to his white face. "We have never lifted a finger to harm you,
and now over two dozen draenei are dead from your attacks!"
The truth of the comment made Durotan even angrier. "The ancestors do not lie to us," he snarled. "We have been warned that you
are not what you would seem—that you are our enemies. Why did you bring those crystals if not to attack us?" "We thought it
might help us better communicate with the being in the mountain." Velen spoke quickly, as if trying to get the words out before
Durotan could silence him. "It is not an enemy to the orcs,nor are We. Durotan, you are intelligent and wise. I saw this in you that
night so long ago. You are not one to blindly follow like an animal to slaughter. I know not why your leaders lie to you, but they
do. We have ever sought to interact peaceably with you. You are better than this, son of Gar .id. You are not like the others!"
Durotan's dark brown eyes narrowed. "You are wrong, draenei," he spat. "I am proud to be an ore. I embrace my heritage."
Velen looked exasperated. "You misunderstand. I do not malign your people. I merely—¦¾
"Merely what? Merely tell us that the only reason We are seeing the beloved dead is because of your . . . your god trapped in the
mountain?"
"It is not a god, it is an ally, and would be one to your people as well if you would permit it to be."
Durotan swore and rose, stalking about the tent, his hands clenching and unclenching. Then he uttered a long, deep sigh, the anger
in him burning down to ashes.
"Velen, your words are but wood on the fire of our wrath," he said quietly. "Your claim is arrogant and offensive. It will support
those who are already prepared to slay your people on the word oi our ancestors. I do not understand myself—but you are asking
to choose
between people I trust, traditions I have been raised on, and your word."
He turned and faced the draenei. "I will choose my people. You need to know this. If you and I come face-to-face on the field of
battle, I will not stay my hand."
Velen looked only curious. "You .. . will not take me to Ner’zhul, then?"
Durotan shook his head. "No. If he wanted you, he should have come for you himself. He appointed me to treat with you, and I
have carried out my duties as I saw fit."
"You were supposed to deliver a prisoner to him," Velen said.
"I was to meet with you and listen to your words," Durotan said. "Had I captured you in battle, stricken a weapon from your
hands, and wrested you to the earth, then yes, you would be a prisoner. But there is no honor in binding a foe who extends his
hands willingly for the rope. We are at an impasse, you and I. You insist that you have no ill will toward the ores. My leaders and
the ghosts of my ancestors tell me otherwise."
Again, Durotan knelt before the draenei. "They call you Prophet—do you know the future then? If so, then tell me what you and I
can do to avert what I fear will unfold. I would not shed innocent life, Velen. Give me something, anything, I can take to Ner’zhul
that will prove that what you say is true!"
He realized he was pleading, but the fact did not distress him. He loved his wife, his clan, his people. He hated what he was
seeing: an entire generation rushing headlong to adulthood with only blind hate in their hearts. If begging before this strange being
could change this, then beg he would.
The strange blue eyes held an unspeakable empathy. Velen extended a pale hand and placed it on Durotan's shoulder.
"The future is not like a book one can read," he said quietly. "It is ever changing, like the rush of water, or the swirl of sand. I am
granted certain insights, but nothing more, I felt very strongly that I needed to come unarmed, and behold, I am greeted not by the
ores' greatest shaman, but by one who has slept safely under my roof. I do not think this an accident. Durotan. And if anything can
be done to avert this, it lies with the orcs, not with the draenei. AH I can do is tell you what I have already said. The river's course
can be changed. But you are the ones who must change it. That is all I know, and I pray it is enough to save my people."
The look on his ancient, oddly cracked face and the tone of his voice told Durotan what his words did not: that Velen did not,
indeed, think it would be enough to save his people.
Durotan closed his eyes for a moment, then stepped back. "We will keep the stones," he said. "Whatever power they have, the
shaman will learn how to harness."
Velen nodded sadly "Such I assumed," he said. "But I had to bring them. I had to trust that we could find a way past all of this."
Why was it, Durotan wondered, that he felt closer at this moment to one he had been told was an enemy than to the spiritual leader
of his own people? Draka might know. She had known all along. She had said nothing, understanding with a wisdom he could not
comprehend that he had to come to this moment on his own. But he would speak to her tonight, alone in their tent.
"Get up." he said, speaking roughly to hide his emotions, "You and your companions may leave safely." He grinned suddenly. "As
safely as you might, in the darkness, with no weapons. If you come to your deaths this night when you are past our territory, it will
not be on my head."
"That would be convenient for you," agreed Velen, getting to his feet. "But somehow. I think it is not what you want."
Durotan did not reply. He marched out of the tent and told the waiting guards. "Velen and his four companions are to be safely
escorted to the borders of our lands. Then, they will be released, to return to then-city. No harm is to befall them, is that clear?"
The guard looked as if he was about to protest, but another, wiser warrior shot him a fierce glance.
"Very clear, my chieftain," the first guard murmured. As they went to fetch the other draenei, Drek’Thar hurried up to Durotan.
"Durotan! What are you doing? Ner’zhul expects prisoners!" "Ner’zhul can take his prisoners himself," Durotan snarled. "I was in
command, and this is my decision. Do you question it?"
Drek’Thar looked around and walked Durotan away from prying cars. "I do," he hissed. "You heard what he said! He claims the
ancestors are—are like moths to a torch around this god of his! The arrogance! Ner’zhul is right. They must be eliminated. We
have been told so!"
"if it is to be, then it will be," said Durotan. "But not this night, Drek’Thar. Not this night."
As he and his companions walked slowly over the dew-drenched grasses of die meadows, past the towering black silhouettes of
the trees of Terokkar forest, toward the nearest city, Velen's heart was heavy.
Two of the ata'mal crystals were now in the possession of the ores. He had no doubt but that Durotan's words were correct, and
that their shaman would shortly unlock their secrets. But they had missed one.
They had missed it because it did not wish to be found, and when it came to the crystals, light obeyed its wishes and bent itself so
that the violet crystal remained hidden from the view of the searching ores. He held it close to his heart now, feeling its warmth
seep into his ancient flesh.
He had gambled, and failed. Not completely; that he and his friends were alive and walking toward safety was testimony to that.
But he had hoped the ores
would listen, that they would at least accompany him into the heart of their own sacred mountain, and behold something that did
not negate their faidi, not in the slightest, but had in fact given birth to it.
The oudook was grim. As he had walked into the camp, he had observed what was happening. Younglings were being trained so
hard they were dropping from exhaustion. Forges were going even so late at night. For all that he was walking freely now, Velen
knew that the incidents of today had done nothing to avert what would come. The orcs,even the ones led by the insightful, slow to
anger Durotan, were not just preparing for the possibility of war. They were convinced of the certainty of it. When the sun showed
her yellow head tomorrow morning, she would look upon the inevitable.
The crystal he held so close to his heart pulsed, sensing his thoughts. Velen turned to his companions and looked upon them
sorrowfully.
"The ores will not be dissuaded from this path," he said. "And therefore, if we are to survive . . . we, too, must walk the path to
war."
Far in the distance, broken, dying, resting as peacefully as possible deep below the waters of the sacred pool, the being known as
K’ure uttered a deep, agonized cry.
Velen started, recognizing the voice, and bowed his head. The Frostwolf ores gasped at the sound and turned to regard the perfect
triangle of Oshu'gun.
"The ancestors are angry with us!" a young shaman cried. "Angry for letting Velen go!"
Durotan shook his head. He ought to rebuke the youngster, and on the morrow, if such words were uttered again, he would. But
now. his heart was full of sorrow. It was not a cry of anger that came from the sacred mountain. It was the wrenching sound of
ultimate grief, and he shuddered inside as he wondered why the ancestors mourned so very, very deeply.
ELEVEN
Ner'zhul... Gul'dan. Two of the darkest names ever to sully the history of my people. And yet, Dreh'Thar tells me that once
Ner'zhul was admired, even beloved, and truly cared for the people whose spiritual leader he was. It is hard to reconcile those
words with what Ner'zhul has become, but I try. I try because I want to understand. And yet, try as I might... I do not.
"What?"
Ner’zhul's shriek of outrage made his apprentice Gul'dan wince, Durotan did not bat an eye.
"I released the Prophet Velen," the chieftain of the Frostwolf clan said calmly.
"Your orders were to take him and the others prisoner!" Ner’zhul's voice climbed with each word. It had been so plain, so easy.
What had Durotan been thinking? To toss away this opportunity like bones when the meat had been devoured! How much
information could they have extracted from Velen? What kind of bargaining power over the draenei would he have bought them?
But that thought was dwarfed by the overwhelming horror of how Kil’jaeden would react. What would he do when he learned that
Velen had not been captured? The beautiful being had been seemingly well pleased at the prospect, when Ner’zhul told him of the
plan. Flushed with pride at his cleverness, thinking victory already assured. Ner’zhul had even dared to offer Velen to Kil’jaeden
as a sort of present. Now what would happen? The realization that he felt fear rather than chagrin at bringing disappointing news
was not lost on the shaman.
"You put me in charge of the capture, and capture them I did," Durotan replied. "But there is no honor in a prisoner taken
willingly. You want us to be strong as a people, rather than as individual clans, and we cannot do that without a code of honor that
is inviolable, that is—"
Durotan continued speaking in his gruff, deep voice, but Ner’zhul was no longer listening. At that instant, that frozen space in
time. Ner’zhul had a sudden realization that Kil’jaeden might not be the benevolent spirit he presented himself as. Durotan, lost in
his own voice speaking words to explain his decision, did not notice the shaman's shift in attention. But Ner’zhul felt Gul'dan's
gaze upon him. and another fear welled up inside him that Gul'dan was bearing witness to his master's first hints of doubt.
What is the right thing to do? How can I best serve?
Why is Rulkan no longer coming to me?
He blinked and came back to himself when he realized tfrat Durotan had ceased speaking. The large chieftain was regarding
Ner’zhul intently, waiting for the shaman to speak.
How best to handle this? Durotan was well regarded among the clans. If Ner’zhul punished Durotan for his decision, there would
be many who would respond with sympathy to the Frostwolf clan. It could cause a rift in the fabric Ner’zhul was trying to weave,
the tightly knit fabric of a united orc nation ... a Horde, if you will. On the other hand, if he condoned Durotan's actions, it would
be a severe and insulting blow to those who had fervently supported his previous position that the draenei must die.
He could not decide. He stared at Durotan, who began to frown slightly.
"My master is so overcome with rage that he cannot speak," came Gul'dan's smooth voice. Both Durotan and Ner’zhul turned to
look at the younger shaman. "You have disobeyed a direct order from your spiritual leader. Return to your camp, Durotan, son of
Garad. My master will send you a letter shortly conveying his decision."
Durotan glanced back at Ner’zhul, his dislike of Gul'dan plain on his broad face. Ner’zhul gathered himself and stood tall, and this
time, when he reached for words, he found them. "Begone, Durotan. You have displeased me. and worse, you have displeased the
being who has shown us such favor. You will hear from me soon enough."
Durotan bowed, but did not leave immediately. "There is one thing I do bring you," he said. He extended a small bundle to
Ner’zhul. The shaman accepted it with hands that shook, and hoped desperately that both Durotan and Gul'dan would interpret the
trembling as fury and not fear.
"We took these off the prisoners," Durotan continued. "Our shaman believe that they may hold power that we can use against the
draenei."
He hesitated a moment longer, as if waiting for further word from Ner’zhul. When the silence stretched long and uncomfortably
between them, he bowed again and left. For a long moment, neither master nor apprentice spoke.
"My master, please forgive me for interrupting. I saw you were so overcome that you could not speak, and I feared that the
Frostwolf boy would misinterpret your anger as hesitancy."
Ner’zhul shot him a searching look. The words sounded sincere. Gul'dan's face looked sincere. And yet-There was once a time
when Ner’zhul would have confessed his doubt to his apprentice. He had trusted and trained him for years. But now, at this
moment, although battered by uncertainties as if by opposing winds, Ner’zhul knew one thing very clearly. He did not want
Gul'dan to see any weakness in him.
"I was indeed overcome with rage," Ner’zhul lied. "Honor serves nothing if it hurts your people."
He realized he was clutching the bundle Durotan had given him. Gul'dan was staring at it almost hungrily.
"What did Durotan give you, to offset your anger with him?" Gul'dan inquired.
Ner’zhul looked at him with a superior air. "I will examine it first, and share it with Kil’jaeden, apprentice," he said coolly. He
was looking for a reaction, and dreaded seeing it.
For the briefest of moments, anger flitted across Gul'dan's face. Then the younger orc bowed deeply and said contritely, "Of
course, my master. It was arrogant of me to expect— I am merely curious, that is all, to see if the Frostwolf chieftain has
contributed anything of worth."
Ner’zhul softened somewhat. Gul'dan had served him well and loyally for many years now, and indeed, would succeed Ner’zhul
when the time came. He was jumping at shadows.
"Of course," Ner’zhul said, more gently. "I will let you know if I learn anything. After all, you are my apprentice, are you not?"
Gul'dan brightened. "I serve you in all things, my master." Looking happier, he bowed again and left Ner’zhul alone.
Ner’zhul sat heavily on the skins that served him for a bed. He cradled the bundle in his lap and said a prayer to the ancestors that
if Durotan had failed to deliver the leader of the draenei, perhaps at least the Frostwolf chieftain had managed to obtain something
of value.
He took a deep breath, unwrapped the bundle, and gasped. Nestled against soft fur were two glowing gems. Gingerly, Ner’zhul
touched the red one and gasped again.
Energy, excitement, and a sense of power flowed through him. His hands wanted to grip a weapon, although he had had no need
of one for years, and he yearned to swing it. Somehow he knew that if this crystal were on his person, his aim would be true. What
a gift this was to the ores! He would have to see how he could turn this hot, red passion for fighting that lurked in the center of this
stone to his purposes.
It took a great effort of will for him to release the red crystal. He breathed deeply, calming himself as his mind cleared.
The yellow one next.
Ner’zhul grasped it. This time, he had some idea of what to expect. Again, he felt it emanating warmth and a sensation of power.
But this time, there was no excitement, no urgency. As he held the yellow crystal, his mind cleared and he realized that he had
hitherto been seeing things as if in a fog-dense valley. He could not find the words to describe it, but there was a purity, a clarity, a
precision to everything. It was, in fact, so keen, so clear that Ner’zhul began to perceive this opening of his mind as pain.
He dropped the crystal back into his lap. The brilliant clarity, knife-sharp, faded somewhat.
Ner’zhul smiled. If he did not have Velen himself to present to Kil’jaeden. at least he had these precious items to offer to appease
the magnificent being.
Kil’jaeden was furious.
Ner’zhul quaked before that anger, prostrating himself on the earth, murmuring, "Forgive me ..." as Kil’jaeden raged. He squeezed
his eyes shut, anticipating pain such as he had never experienced to suddenly start shooting along his body, when abruptly the
raging ceased.
Cautiously, Ner’zhul risked a glance at his benefactor, Kil’jaeden was once more looking serene, poised, and calm and bathed in
radiance.
"I am . . . disappointed," the Beautiful One murmured. He shifted his weight from one enormous cloven foot to the other. "But I
know two things. The Frostwolf clan leader is the one responsible. And you will never, ever, trust him with an important task
again."
Relief swept through Ner’zhul and he almost fainted from the sensation, so powerful was it. "Of course not, my lord. Never again.
And . . . we did find these crystals for you."
"They are of little use to mc," said Kil’jaeden. Ner’zhul winced. "But I think your people might find them helpful in your battle to
crush the draenei. That is your battle, is it not?" Fear again clenched hard at Ner’zhul's heart. "Of course, lord! It is the ancestors*
will."
Kil’jaeden looked at him for a moment, his brilliant eyes emanating flames. "It is my will." he said simply, and Ner’zhul nodded
frantically.
"Of course, of course, it is your will, and I obey you in all things."
Kil’jaeden seemed satisfied by the response and nodded. Then he was gone, and Ner’zhul sank back, wiping a face greasy with
the sweat of terror.
Out of the corner of his eye he saw a flash of something white. Gul'dan had seen everything.
We have been planning an attack for some time now, and last night, when the Pale Lady did not shine, we descended in force
upon the sleeping little town. Not a one was left alive, not even the few children we found. Their supplies—food, armor, weapons,
some strange items we know nothing of and shun—this bounty is now shared between the two unified clans. Their blood, blue and
thick, dries now upon our faces, and we dance in celebration.
There was more to the missive, but Ner’zhul did not read it. He did not have to. Although the details might be different, the
essence of the letters was always the same. A successful attack, glory in the killing, the ecstasy of blood spilled. Ner’zhul glanced
at the pile of letters he had received just that morning: seven of them.
With each month that passed, even throughout the long, hard winter months, the ores grew more skilled at killing draenei. They
had learned much about their foe with each victor)'. The stones that Durotan had given Ner’zhul proved to be valuable indeed,
Ner’zhul worked with them, alone at first, and then in the company of other shaman. The red stone they dubbed the Heart of Fury,
and they found that when the leader of a raid carried it. not only did he fight with more energy and skill, but everyone under his
command benefited as well. The stone was passed from clan to clan at each new moon, and was highly coveted. Yet Ner’zhul
knew no one would dare to steal it for himself.
The second stone he called the Brilliant Star, and he found that when a shaman carried the crystal, he or she experienced a
profound focus and clarity. While the Heart of Fury roused the emotions, the Brilliant Star calmed them. The thought process was
swifter and more precise, and concentration was not easily broken. The result was powerful magic, precisely controlled ... another
key to an orcish victor)'. The delicious irony that they were using the draenei's own magic against them further improved morale
among the ores.
But all these things did not hearten Ner’zhul. The sudden flash of doubt that had shuddered through him when he had spoken with
Durotan had shaken him to the bone. He fought back the suspicions, terrified that somehow Kil’jaeden was able to read his
thoughts. But they came, like maggots writhing from a corpse, to haunt his sleeping and waking thoughts. Kil’jaeden looked very,
very similar to the draenei. Was it possible that they were somehow the same? And was he, Ner’zhul, being used in some sort of
civil war?
One night, he found he could no longer bear it. Silently, he dressed and roused his wolf Skychascr, who stretched and blinked at
him sleepily
"Come, my friend." Ner’zhul said affectionately as he settled on the great creature's back. He had never before ridden to the sacred
mountain. Always, he had walked, as was tradition. But he needed to return before he was missed, and he was certain that the urgency of his mission would mitigate his offense with the ancestors.
It was almost spring, almost time for the Kosh'harg festival, but spring seemed far away as the cold wind bit at Ner’zhul's cars and
nose. He huddled down, grateful for the warmth of the massive wolf, and shielded himself as best he could from the wind and now
snow.
The wolf pressed on through the drifts, making steady if not swift progress. At last. Ner’zhul looked up and saw the perfect
triangle of the Mountain of Spirits, and a great weight suddenly lifted from his heart. For the first time in months, he truly felt as if
he was doing the right thing.
Skychascr would have difficulty climbing, so with a command to "stay" he settled down, burrowing into a drift and curling up
tightly. Ner’zhul did not imagine he would be more than a few hours, and hurried to climb
the mountain with more alacrity than he had felt in a long time, his sack heavy with watcrskins and his heart full of anticipation.
He should have done this long ago. He should have gone right to the source of wisdom, as shaman before him had done. He had
no idea why he had never thought of this before.
At last he came to the entrance and paused before the perfect oval. As anxious as he was to reach the ancestors, he knew the ritual
must be honored. He lit the bundle of dried grasses he carried and let its sweet scent calm and purify his thoughts. Then he stepped
forward, murmuring a spell to light the torches that lined the walk. Ner’zhul had walked this path more times than he could recall,
and his feet moved steadily as if of their own accord. Down twined the smooth path, and Ner’zhul's heart raced with hope as he
stepped forward into the darkness.
It seemed to take longer than usual for him to become aware of the increase in light. Ner’zhul stepped into the cavern, and thought
that somehow, the light emanating from the sacred pool seemed dimmer than it had been in the past. The thought unsettled him.
He took a deep breath and chided himself. He was bringing his own external fears to this sacred space, nothing more. He stepped
to the pool, removed the watcrskins from his pack, and poured out the contents. The soft splashing of water was the only sound,
and it seemed to echo. His offering complete, Ner’zhul sat by the water's edge and waited, gazing into the radiant depths.
Nothing happened.
He did not panic. Sometimes the ancestors took their time about responding.
But when more time had passed, uncase began to stir in Ner’zhul's heart. Moved, he spoke aloud.
"Ancestors . . . beloved dead ... I, Ner’zhul, shaman of the Shadowmoon clan, leader to your children, have come seeking . . . no.
begging wisdom. I—I have lost my way to your light. The times are dark and fearful even as we grow stronger, more united as a
people. I question the path I am on. and I beseech your guidance. Please, if ever you loved and cared for those who have followed
in your footsteps, come to me now and advise me, that I may lead them well!"
His voice quavered. He knew he sounded lost and pathetic, and for a moment stubborn pride made him flush with shame. But then
that feeling was chased away by the knowledge that he did care for his people, he did want to do what was right for them, and at
this moment he had no idea what that might be.
The pool began to glow. Ner’zhul leaned forward eagerly, his eyes roaming the surface, and in the water, he saw a face looking
back at him.
"Rulkan," he breathed. For a moment quick tears mercifully blurred her image. He blinked and his heart lurched with pain as he
saw the look in her ghostly eyes.
It was hatred.
Ner’zhul recoiled as if struck. Other faces began to appear in the water, dozens of them. All of them had the same expression.
Nausea welled in him and he cried out, "Please! Help me! Grant me your wisdom that I may win favor again in your eyes!"
Rulkan's severe features softened somewhat, and it was with a trace of compassion in her voice that she spoke. "There is nothing
you can do, not now. not in a hundred years, to win favor in our eyes. You are not a savior of your people, but their betrayer."
"No!" he shrieked. "No, tell me what to do and I will do it. It is not too late, surely it is not too late—"
"You are not strong enough," said another rumbling voice, this one male. "If you were, you would never have walked so far down
this path. You would not have been so easily gulled into doing the will of one who bears no love for our people."
"But— I do not understand," Ner’zhul murmured. "Rulkan, you came to me! I heard you! You, Grekshar—you advised me!
Kil’jaeden was the one you wanted me to embrace! The Great Friend to all the ores!
She said nothing in response to this; she did not have to. Even as the words tumbled from his lips he understood how profoundly
he had been misled.
The ancestors had never appeared to him at all. It had all been a trick concocted by Kil’jaeden, whoever— whatever—he was.
They were right not to trust Ner’zhul now. Any shaman who would be so easily deceived could never be trusted to put things right
again. All was an elaborate web of lies and deceit and manipulation. And he, Ner’zhul, had been the first foolish insect to become
inextricably trapped in it.
Nearly a hundred draenei were dead. There was no turning back, no requesting aid from the ancestors. He could not trust any of
his visions ever again, except to understand that they were likely to be lies. Worst of all, he had delivered his people into the hands
of one who, despite his fair appearance and his honeyed words, did not have their best interests in whatever passed for his heart.
Even as he stared into the ghostly eyes of his beloved, she turned away from him. One by one, the myriad faces reflected in the
water followed suit.
Ner’zhul trembled with the horror of what he had done. There was nothing he could do to make it right. Nothing he could do
except continue on this path that Kil’jaeden had so carefully contrived for him to walk, and pray to ancestors who no longer
listened to him that somehow, some way, things would turn out all right. He buried his face in his hands and wept.
Crouching in the darkness in a bend in the tunnel, Gul’dan listened to the sound of his master sobbing, and smiled to himself.
Kil’jaeden would be grateful for the information.
TWELVE
We are all weak, in one way or another. It does not matter the species. Sometimes that weakness is a strength in disguise.
Sometimes it is our utter undoing. Sometimes it is both. The wise man understands his weakness and seeks to find a lesson from it.
The fool lets it control and destroy him.
And sometimes, the wise man is a fool.
As he rode back atop Skychaser, hands so cold that he wondered if he would ever be able to unclench them entwined in the thick
black fur, Ner’zhul wished for the dark night to swallow him. How could he return to his people, knowing what he had done to
them? On the other hand, how could he flee—and where could he possibly go that Kil’jaeden would not find him? He longed bitterly for the courage to take the ritual knife he carried at all times and drive it into his heart, but knew that he could not. Suicide
was not regarded with honor among his people; it was a coward's answer to the problems that came at him. He would not be
permitted to live on as a spirit if he took that seductive way to escape the horrors that confronted him.
He could continue to pretend that he suspected nothing, and even perhaps subtly undercut Kil’jaeden. Despite his massive powers,
there had been no evidence that the so-called "Beautiful One" had the ability to read thoughts. The thought brightened Ner’zhul
somewhat. Yes ... he could mitigate the damage this interloper was trying to do to his people. That was how he could continue to
serve.
Exhausted both physically and emotionally, Ner’zhul stumbled into his tent in that faint hour before dawn, looking forward to
simply collapsing on the skins and sleeping in an effort to forget, for at least a brief while, the agony of what he had brought
about.
Instead a bright light nearly blinded him and he fell to his knees.
"You would betray me, then?" said the Beautiful One.
Ner’zhul threw up his hands, trying vainly to protect his eves from the awesome radiance. His stomach
J
roiled and he feared he was about to be sick in his terror. The light dimmed somewhat and he lowered his hands. Standing beside
Kil’jaeden was Ner’zhul's apprentice, grinning darkly.
"Gul'dan," whispered Ner’zhul sickly. "What have you done?"
"I have informed Kil’jaeden of a rodent," Gul'dan said calmly. That dreadful smile never left his face. 'And he will decide what to
do with the vermin who would so turn against him."
There was still snow on Gul'dan's shoulders. Dully, Ner’zhul realized what had happened. His apprentice, hungry for power—how
was it Ner’zhul had closed his eyes to the obvious for so long?—had followed him. Had heard the ancestors' words. And still he
clung to Kil’jaeden, after hearing the same things Ner’zhul had heard? For a moment, his own fear and selfishness went away, and
Ner’zhul felt only a wave of pity for an orc who had fallen so far.
"It wounds me," Kil’jaeden said. Ner’zhul looked at him, startled. "I chose you, Ner’zhul. I gave you my powers. I showed you
what you need to do to advance your people and ensure that they are never second in this world."
Ner’zhul spoke without thinking. "You have deceived me. You have sent me false visions. You have maligned the ancestors and
all they stood for. I don't know why you are doing this, but I know that it is not out of love for my people."
"And yet they flourish. They are united, for the first time in many centuries."
"United under a lie," Ner’zhul said. He was giddy in his rebellion. It felt good. Perhaps if he continued, Kil’jaeden would lose
patience with him and slay him, and Ner’zhul's problem would be solved. But Kil’jaeden did not respond with deadly fury as
Ner’zhul hoped he would. Instead the being sighed deeply and shook his head, like a parent disappointed in a wayward child.
"You may yet regain my favor, Ner’zhul," Kil’jaeden said, "I have a task for you. If you complete it, your lapse of faith will be
overlooked."
Ner’zhul's lips moved. He wanted to shout out his rebellion again, but this time the words would not come. He realized that the
moment had passed. He did not want to die, any more than any sane, living being wanted to die, and so he remained silent.
"What happened with the Frostwolf chieftain troubles mc," Kil’jaeden continued. "Not least because he is not the only one who
has murmured against what is happening. There are others—the one who wields the Doomhammer, some among the Bladcwind
and Rcdwalker clans as well. It would be one thing if these opposing voices belonged to those of no consequence, but many of
them do not. There must be no risk to the success of my plan. Therefore, I will guarantee their obedience.
"It is not enough for them to swear loyalty," Kil’jaeden continued. He tapped his check with one long red finger thoughtfully.
"Too many seem enamored of changing what 'honor' and 'oath' mean. We must . . . ensure their cooperation, for now, and for all
time."
Gul'dan's small eyes glinted. "What is it you suggest. Great One?"
Kil’jaeden smiled at Gul'dan. Already, Ner’zhul could see the bond between them—sec how like Kil’jaeden Gul'dan was in a way
that Ner’zhul had never been. Kil’jaeden had been forced to use seductive lies and trickery in order to pull Ner’zhul to his cause;
with Gul'dan, he could speak openly.
"There is such a way," Kil’jaeden said, speaking to both orc shaman now. "A way to make them forever bound to us. Forever
loyal."
Ner’zhul had thought that he had become inured to horror after what the ancestors had revealed to him, but now he realized that he
was capable of experiencing an entirely new level of shock as he listened to Kil’jaeden outline the plan. Forever bound. Forever
loyal.
Forever enslaved.
He looked up into Kil’jaeden's blazing eyes, and words would not come. A nod would suffice, he knew, but he could not even
bring himself to do that. Instead he simply stared, transfixed, like a bird before a snake.
Kil’jaeden heaved a deep sigh. "You refuse your chance at redemption in my eyes, then?"
As he heard Kil’jaeden speak, it was as if a spell had been removed from Ner’zhul. The words that had been stuck in his throat
came rushing out, and although he knew they would mean his doom, the shaman made no move to stop them.
"I refuse utterly to forever doom my people to a life of slavery," he cried. Kil’jaeden listened, then nodded his massive head. "This
is your choice. You have also chosen the consequences. Know this, shaman. Your choice averts nothing. My desires will still be
carried out. Your people will still be slaves. But instead of leading them and lingering in my favor, you will be forced to be a
helpless observer. I think that will be sweeter than if I simply slew you."
Ner’zhul opened his mouth to speak, but he could not. Kil’jaeden narrowed his great eyes, and Ner’zhul could not even move.
Even his heart, slamming wildly in his chest, beat only by the will of Lord Kil’jaeden, and he knew it.
How had he been such a gullible fool? How had he not seen through the lies?
How could he have mistaken an illusion sent by this.. , this monster to be the spirit of his beloved mate? Tears welled in his eyes
and slipped down his checks, only, he knew, because Kil’jaeden permitted it.
Kil’jaeden smiled at him, then slowly, deliberately turned his attention to Gul’dan. Even in his wretched state, Ner’zhul took the
faintest comfort in the knowledge that he had not turned to Kil’jaeden with the expression Gul’dan now wore, that of a hungry
pup eager for praise.
"There is no need to trap you with pretty lies, is there, my new tool?" said Kil’jaeden, speaking almost fondly to Gul’dan, "You do
not shrink from the truth."
"Indeed, no. lord. I live to do your bidding."
Kil’jaeden chuckled. "If I will do away with lies, so
must you. You live for power. You hunger for it. You thirst for it. And over the last few months, your skill has grown to where I
can make proper use of you. Ours is not a partnership of adoration or respect, but one of convenience and selfish benefit. Which
means that it will likely last."
Various emotions flitted across Gul'dan's face. He did not seem to know how to react to the words, and Ner’zhul took pleasure in
his former apprentice's discomfiture.
"As . . . you will." Gul’dan stammered finally, then with more confidence, "tell me what you would have me do, and I swear, it
will be done."
"You have no doubt perceived that I wish to exterminate the draenei. Why I do so is no concern of yours. You need only know
that I wish it. The orcs are doing moderately well in this, but they can do better. Theyshall do better. A warrior is only as good as
his weapons, and, Gul’dan, I intend to give you and your people weapons such as you have never conceived. It will take a little
time; you must be educated first, before you are fit to teach the others. Are you ready and willing?"
Gul'dan's eyes shone, "Begin the lessons. Glorious One. and you will see how apt a pupil of yours I am."
Kil’jaeden laughed.
Durotan was covered with blood, much of it his own. What had gone wrong? Everything had progressed as normal. They had
found the hunting party, descended upon them, initiated the attack, and waited for the shaman to use their magic to fight the
draenei.
They did not do so. Instead Frostwolf after Frostwolf fell beneath the shining blades and blue-white magics of the draenei. At one
point, fighting for his very life, Durotan saw that Drek’Thar was fighting desperately, using nothing but his staff.
What had happened? Why had the shaman not come to his aid? What was Drek’Thar thinking? He could wield a staff hardly
better than a child—why did he not use his magic?
The draenei fought furiously, seizing the opportunities the shaman's inexplicable inaction had given them. They pressed their
attack harder than Durotan had ever seen, their eyes glinting as for perhaps the first time they sensed victory. The grass was
slippery with blood, and Durotan's feet went out from under him. He fell, and his attacker raised his sword.
This was the moment, then. He would die in glorious battle. Except he did not feel that this was a glorious battle. By instinct
alone, he raised his axe to parry the blow that would come, although his arm had been deeply cut at the joint of the armor and his
limb quivered. He looked up into the eyes of the one who would slay him.
And recognized Restalaan.
At that moment, the draenei captain of the guard's own glowing blue eyes widened in recognition and he
stayed his blow. Durotan gasped for breath, trying to summon the energy to rise and continue the fight. Restalaan uttered
something in his ululating tongue, and every draenei halted almost in mid-swing.
As Durotan got to his feet, he realized that there were only a handful of his warriors left alive. Two more moments of battle and
the draenei would have slaughtered the entire party, with only two or three casualties on their own side.
Restalaan whirled on Durotan. Various expressions warred on his ugly face: compassion, disgust, regret, determination. "For the
act of compassion and honor you showed our prophet, Durotan, son of Garad, you and those of your clan who yet live have been
spared. Treat your wounded and return to your homes. But do not think to receive such mercy from us again. Honor has been
satisfied."
Durotan weaved as if he had had too much to drink as blood dripped from deep wounds. He forced himself to stay on his feet by
sheer will as the draenei turned and disappeared over the horizon. Once they were out of sight, he could force his legs to hold him
no longer and he fell to his knees. Several ribs had been cracked or broken, and each inhalation sent a stabbing pain through him.
"Durotan!"
It was Draka. She, too, had been badly injured, but her voice was strong. Relief washed over Durotan. Thank the ancestors, she
yet lived. Drek’Thar hurried up to him and placed his hands on Durotan's heart, murmuring under his breath. Warmth flooded
Durotan and the pain cased. He took a deep, nourishing breath.
"At least they will let me heal," said Drek’Thar, so softly that Durotan was scarce certain he heard the words.
"Tend to the others, and then we will speak," Durotan said. Drek’Thar nodded, not meeting his chieftain's eves. He and the other
shaman hastened to magically heal what wounds they could, and treat with salves and bandages what they could not. Durotan still
had injuries, but nothing life-threatening, and he assisted the shaman.
When Durotan had done all he could, he rose and looked around. No fewer than fifteen bodies were stiffening on the green grass,
including Rokkar, his second. Durotan shook his head in stunned disbelief.
He would have to return with litters, to bear the fallen back to their lands. They would burn on a pyre, their bodies given to fire,
their ashes to air, to be consumed by water and earth. Their spirits would go to Oshu'gun, and the shaman would converse with
them on matters of profound importance.
Or would they? Something terrible had happened, and it was time he found out what.
Sudden anger flooded him at the waste. Despite what the ancestors had told him, something inside Durotan continued to whisper
that this attack on the
draenei was a grave mistake. He whirled on Drek’Thar, and with a deep growl seized the smaller orc where he sat gulping water
and hauled him to his feet.
"This was a slaughter!" Durotan cried, shaking him furiously. "Fifteen of our kin lie dead before us! The earth drinks deeply of
their blood, and I never saw you or any of the others lend your skill to the fight!"
For a moment, Drek’Thar could not speak. The meadow was deathly silent as every Frostwolf watched the confrontation. Then, in
a faint voice, Drek’Thar replied, "The elements—they would not come this time."
Durotan's eyes narrowed. Still clutching Drek’Thar by the front of his leather jerkin, he demanded of the wide-eyed, silent
shaman, "Is this true? They would not lend their aid to the battle?"
Looking stunned and sick, the shaman nodded. One said in a quavering voice, "It is true, great chieftain. I asked all of them in
turn. They said . .. they said it was out of balance, and they would no longer permit us to use their powers."
Durotan's shock was broken by an angry hiss. He turned to see Draka's scowling face. "This is more than a sign! This is a shout, a
battle cry, that what We are doing is wrong!"
Slowly, trying to comprehend the magnitude of what had happened, Durotan nodded. If it were not for the mercy Restalaan had
shown him, he and every last member of the war party would be lying on the earth. their bodies growing colder by the moment.
The elements had refused their assistance. They had condemned what the shaman were asking of them.
Durotan took a deep breath and shook his head, as if to physically shake away the dark thoughts. "Let us get the injured back to
their homes as swiftly as we may. And then . . . then I will send out letters. If what I fear is true—that it is not only the shaman of
the Frostwolf clan who are shunned by the elements for what we are doing to the draenei—then we must confront Ner’zhul."
THIRTEEN
How is it we did not see? It is easy to lay the blame on the charismatic Kil'jaeden, or the weak Ner’zhul, or the power-hungry
Gul'dan for our fall. But they asked of each individual orc to pretend that hot was cold, that sweet was sour, and even when
everything in us screamed against what we were being told, we followed. I was not there, I cannot say why. Perhaps I, too, would
have obeyed like a whipped cur. Periiaps thefearwas so great, or the respect for our leaders so ingrained. Perhaps.
Or perhaps I, like my father and others, would start to see the flaws. I would like to think so.
Blackhand looked out from under his bushy eyebrows, frowning. He always looked like he was frowning, perhaps because he
almost always was.
"I do not know about this. Gul'dan." he rumbled. His oversized hand went to the hilt of his sword, fondling it in an uneasy gesture.
When Gul'dan had asked to meet with Blackhand a fortnight ago, and to bring his most promising shaman but to tell no one of
what they were to be doing, he had agreed. Blackhand had always liked Gul'dan better than Ner’zhul, although he was not sure
why. When Gul'dan sat down with him over a lavish meal and explained the current situation, Blackhand was very glad he had
come. Now he knew why he liked Gul'dan so much; the former apprentice, now master, was like Blackhand himself. He had no
use for ideals, only practicalities. And power, good food, lavish armor, and bloodshed were things both ores craved.
Blackhand was chieftain of the Blackrock ores. He could rise no higher. At least. . . not until now. When the clans were separate,
the greatest glory was to lead one's clan. But now . . . now they were working together. Now Blackhand could see the glint of
greed in Gul'dan's small eyes. He could almost smell the hunger wafting off the other ore, a hunger he shared.
"Ner’zhul is an honored and valued advisor," Gul'dan said as he chewed dried fruit, extending a claw to pick a chunk where it had
gotten lodged between his teeth. "He has great wisdom. But ... it has been decided that I would be a better choice to lead the ores
from this point on."
Blackhand grinned savagely. Ner’zhul was nowhere to be seen.
"And a wise leader surrounds himself with trusted allies," Gul'dan continued. "Those who are strong and obedient. Who will
fulfill their obligations. And who, for their loyalty, will be held in high regard and richly rewarded."
Blackhand had begun to bridle at the description "obedient," but was mollified when Gul'dan mentioned "high regard" and "richly
rewarded." He glanced over at the eight shaman he had brought to Gul'dan. They were sitting huddled over a second fire some
distance away, being attended to by Gul'dan's servants. They looked wretchedly unhappy, and were conveniently out of earshot.
Blackhand said, "You asked for the shaman. I assume you know what is happening with them?"
Gul'dan sighed and reached for a talbuk leg. He bit deeply into it, the juices running down his face. He wiped hisjuttingjaw
absently, chewed, swallowed, and answered.
"Yes, I have heard. The elements are no longer obeying them."
Blackhand watched him intendy. "Some air beginning to mutter that it is because what we are doing is wrong."
"Do you think that?"
Blackhand shrugged his massive shoulders. "I don't know what to think. This is all new territory. The ancestors say one thing, but
the elements won't come."
He was harboring a growing suspicion about the ancestors as well, but held his tongue. Blackhand knew that many thought him a
fool; he preferred to let them think he was nothing mote than a strong arm and a powerful sword. It gave him distinct advantages.
Gul’dan perused him now. and Blackhand wondered if the new spiritual leader of the ores had sensed there was more to the orc
leader than met the eye.
"We are a proud race." Gul’dan said. "It is sometimes painful to admit that We do not know everything. Kil’jaeden and the entities
he leads . . . ah. Blackhand, the mysteries they harbor! The power they wield—power they are willing to share with usl"
Gul'dan's eyes sparkled now with excitement. Blackhand's own heart began to race. Gul’dan leaned forward and continued to
speak in an awed whisper.
"We air as ignorant children before them. Even you—even I. But they are willing to teach us. Share with us some of their power.
Power that is not dependent upon the whim of the spirits of air. earth, fire, and water." Gul’dan made a dismissive gesture. "Power
such as that is feeble. It is not reliable. It can desert you in the middle of a battle and leave you helpless."
Blackhand's face hardened. He had witnessed this very thing, and it had taken all the strength of his warriors to snatch victory
when the shaman had begun yelping in terror that the elements were no longer working with them.
"I am listening," he growled softly.
"Imagine what you could do if you led a group of shaman who controlled the source of their powers, in
stead of begging and scraping for it," Gul’dan continued. "Imagine if these shaman had servants who could also fight on your side.
Servants who could, say, send your enemies fleeing helplessly in terror. Suck their magic dry as the insects in the summer suck
blood. Distract them so that their attention was not on battle."
Blackhand lifted a bushy eyebrow. "I can imagine success under those conditions. Success almost every time."
Gul’dan nodded, grinning. "Exactly."
"But how do you know this is true, and not some false promise whispered in your car?"
Gul'dan's grin widened. "Because, my friend ... I have experienced this. And I will teach your shaman over there everything I
know."
"Impressive," rumbled Blackhand.
"But that is not all that I can offer. The warriors—I know a way to make you and everyone who fights at your side more powerful,
fiercer, deadlier. All this can be ours if We but claim it."
"Ours?"
"I cannot continue to waste my time speaking with every single leader of every single clan every time they have a complaint."
Gul’dan said, waving his hand imperiously. "There are those who are in agreement with what you and I think is the best way to
proceed . . . and those who are not."
"Go on," said Blackhand.
But Gul’dan did not, at least not right away. He was silent, gathering his thoughts. Blackhand grasped a stick and poked at the fire.
He knew well that most of the orcs,even those of his own clan, thought him hotheaded and impetuous, but he knew the value of
patience.
"I envision two groups of leaders of the ores. One, a simple governing council to make decisions for the whole, its leader elected,
its business conducted openly for all to see. The second ... a shadow of this group. Hidden. Secret. Powerful," Gul'dan said
quietly. "This . . . this Shadow Council will be comprised of ores who share our vision, and who are willing to make the necessary
sacrifices to obtain it."
Blackhand nodded. "Yes . . . yes, I sec. A public leadership . .. and a private one."
Gul'dan's mouth stretched in a slow grin. Blackhand regarded him for a moment, then asked the question.
"And to which one shall I belong?"
"Both, my friend," Gul'dan answered smoothly. "You are a born leader. You have charisma, strength, and even your enemies
know you are a master strategist. It will be case itself to have you elected as leader of the ores."
Blackhand's eyes flashed. "I am no puppet," he growled softly.
"Of course not," said Gul'dan. "Which is why I said you would belong to both. You would be the leader of this new breed of ore,
this ... this Horde, if you will. And you will be on the Shadow Council as well. We cannot work together unless we can trust one
another, can we?"
Blackhand gazed into Gul'dan's glinting, clever eyes
and smiled. He did not trust the shaman in the least bit, and he suspected that Gul'dan felt the same about him. It didn't matter.
They both wanted power. Blackhand knew he did not possess the talents and skills that would enable him to wield the sort of
power for which Gul'dan lusted. And Gul'dan did not want the sort of power Blackhand craved. They were not in competition, but
in league; what benefited one would benefit the other, not rob him of a thing.
Blackhand thought of his family—his mate, Urukal, his two sons. Rend and Maim, his daughter Grisclda. He did not dote on them
the wav that the weak Durotan doted on his mate Draka, of course, but he cared for them. He wanted to see his mate bedecked in
jewels, his sons and daughter revered, as befitted the children of Blackhand.
Out of the corner of his eye, he caught a movement. Turning, he beheld Ner’zhul, once the powerful and now the discarded,
slipping out of the door of the tent.
"What about him?" Blackhand asked.
Gul'dan shrugged. "What about him? He means nothing now. The Beautiful One wishes him kept alive for the moment. He seems
to have something . . . special in mind for Ner’zhul. He will still be a figurehead; love of Ner’zhul is too ingrained in the ores to
cast him aside just yet. But do not worry, he is no threat to us."
"The Blackrock shaman . . . you say you will train them in these new magics? The magics that you yourself have studied? That
they will be invincible?" "I will train them myself, and if they adapt well to the new arts. I will place them first among my new
warlocks,"
Warlock. So that was the name of this new type of magic. It had an interesting sound to it. Warlock. And the Blackrock warlocks
would be the first ones chosen.
"Blackhand, chieftain of the Blackrock clan, what say you to my proposal?"
Blackhand slowly turned toward Gul'dan. "I say, hail to the Horde—and hail to the Shadow Council."
It was an angry crowd that showed up at the foot of the sacred mountain. Durotan had sent out messages to others he trusted, and
had received confirmation that the elements indeed had shunned the shaman. One particularly painful report came from the
Bonechewer clan. Their entire party had fallen to the draenei, their annihilation remaining a mystery until a few days later when a
shaman who had stayed behind tried to heal a sick child.
Now they were coming, the clan leaders and their shaman, to meet with Ner’zhul and demand an explanation.
Ner’zhul came out to greet them, waving his hands and asking for silence.
"I know why you have come today," he said. Durotan frowned. Ner’zhul was so far away that he seemed a mere speck, and yet
Durotan could hear him perfectly. He knew that usually, Ner’zhul
achieved this feat by asking the wind to bear his words so that all could hear him. Yet, if the elements had indeed refused the
shaman, how was that possible? He exchanged glances with Draka, but both remained silent.
"It is indeed true that the elements no longer answer the shaman's call for aid." Ner’zhul kept speaking, but his words were
drowned out by angry shouts. He looked down for a moment, and Durotan regarded him closely. The spiritual leader of the ores
looked more frail, more downtrodden, than Durotan had ever seen. Of course, Durotan thought.
After a few moments, the shouting died down. The ores assembled were angry, but they wanted answers more than they wanted to
vent their rage.
"Some of you have, upon discovering this, leaped to a conclusion that what we are doing is wrong. But that is incorrect. What We
are doing is achieving power the likes of which We have never seen. My apprentice, the noble Gul'dan, has studied these powers. I
will let him answer any questions you have."
Ner’zhul turned and, leaning heavily on his staff, stepped aside. Gul'dan bowed deeply to his master. Ner’zhul did not seem to
notice. He stood, his eyes closed, looking old and frail.
In contrast, Durotan had never seen Gul'dan looking better. There was a new energy about the ore, a strong sense of confidence in
his bearing and in his voice when he spoke. "What I am about to tell you may be hard for you to accept, but I have faith that my
people are not closc-minded when it comes to ways to better themselves," he said. His voice was clear and strong. "Just as we
were surprised and awed to lcam that there were powerful beings other than the ancestors and the elements, we have discovered
that there are ways to harness magic other than cooperating with the elements. Power that is not predicated on asking or begging
or pleading , , , power that comes because we are strong enough to demand it to come. To control it when it docs. To force it to
obey us, bend to our will, rather than the other way around."
Gul'dan paused to let this sink in, looking around at the gathered ores. Durotan glanced at Drek’Thar.
"Is this possible?" he asked his friend.
Drek’Thar shrugged helplessly. He looked completely startled at Gul'dan's words. "I have no idea," he said, "But I tell you, after
that last battle . . . Durotan, the shaman were doing the work of the ancestors! How could the elements refuse us under those
circumstances? And how could the ancestors allow such a thing?"
His voice turned bitter as he spoke. The shock and shame was still upon him. Durotan understood that the shaman felt like a
warrior who had reached confidently for his axe and found it turning to smoke in his hands—an axe a trusted friend had given
him, an axe he had been asked to use in a good cause.
"Yes! Yes, I see you understand the value of what I— what the Beautiful One who has taken us under his wing is offering,"
Gul'dan said, nodding. "I have studied with this great entity, as have these few noble shaman,"
He stepped back and several shaman, dressed in some of the most beautifully tooled leather armor Durotan had ever seen, stepped
forward.
"They are all Blackrock ores," Draka murmured, her brows drawing together in a frown. Durotan had noticed that too.
"What they have learned," Gul'dan continued, "will be taught to every single shaman who wishes to be instructed. This, I swear to
you. Follow me now to the open lands where our Kosh'harg rituals have been held as far back as anyone can remember. I will
have them demonstrate their formidable skills."
For some reason he could not fathom, Durotan felt suddenly ill, Draka squeezed his arm reassuringly, noticing his abrupt paleness.
"My mate, what is it?" she asked quietly as, along with everyone else assembled, the two moved toward the Kosh'harg festival
grounds.
He shook his head. "I don't know," he said in an equally soft voice. "I just... I feel as though something terrible is about to
happen."
Draka grunted. "I have been feeling that way for a long time now."
Durotan kept his face neutral with an effort. He was responsible for the welfare of his people, and his position with Ner’zhul and
likely now Gul'dan was already precarious. Durotan was well aware that if cither shaman sought to discredit him or his clan, it
would be easier than it had been in the past. With the clear focus on union, for the Frostwolf clan to be exiled or in any way cut off
could spell extinction for them. Durotan did not like the direction in which things were going, but he could protest only so much.
For himself, he did not care. But he could not permit his clan to suffer.
And yet—his blood raced, his heart shook, his body trembled with foreboding. He said a quick prayer to the ancestors that they
would continue to guide his people wisely.
They reached the flat river valley that for generations had played host to the Kosh'harg festival. As his feet touched the sacred
ground. Durotan felt himself relaxing slightly. Memories came back to him. and he smiled as they brushed his mind. He recalled
that fateful night when he and Orgrim had both decided to fly in the face of tradition and dared to spy on the adults as they
spoke—and how disappointed both had been at the mundane conversations. Wiser now. he was sure that he and Orgrim, bold
though they had thought themselves at the time, had likely not been the first to be so daring, nor were they likely to be the last.
He recalled, too, his first real glimpse of the female who would become his life-mate, hunting in these lush fields, dancing around
the fire to the sound of the drums throbbing in his veins, and chanting to the moon. As
long as his people still had this, he thought, all would still be well with them. Heartened somewhat, he looked over at where the
dancing was usually held. A small tent was erected, and he wondered what it was for.
He and Draka halted a few yards away from the tent, assuming it was part of the demonstration. The others followed suit. The sun
shone brightly as more and more ores gathered. Durotan saw that most of those who had come today were clan chieftains and their
shaman, so the site did not have to accommodate quite as many as it did during the festival time.
Gul'dan waited until everyone else was assembled before striding purposefully toward the tent. The shaman trained in this
mysterious new magic followed him. They all strode with confidence and pride. Coming to a halt in front of the tent, Gul'dan
beckoned to a few of the Blackrock warriors, who stepped forward and stood at attention.
At that moment, the wind shifted. Durotan's eyes widened as a familiar scent was carried to his nostrils.
Draenei...
Low murmurs around him told him that he was not the only one who had caught the scent. At that moment, Gul'dan nodded to the
warriors. They disappeared inside the tent for a brief moment.
Eight draenei. their hands tighdy bound, emerged from the tent.
Their faces were puffy and swollen from beatings. Rags had been shoved in their mouths. Blood was caked on their blue skin and
what Htdc remained of their clothing. Durotan stared.
"When the Blackrock clan fought using the magic I am about to share with you. their victory was so absolute that they were able
to take several prisoners," Gul'dan said proudly. "These prisoners will help me show you what these new magical abilities can do."
Outrage flooded Durotan. Slaying a foe in armed combat was one thing. Slaughtering helpless prisoners was another. He opened
his mouth, but a hand on his arm stayed his words. He glanced up angrily into Or-grim Doomhammer's cool gray eyes.
"You knew about this." Durotan hissed, his words for his old friend's cars alone.
"Keep your voice down," Orgrim hissed back, glancing about to see if anyone was paying attention to them. No one was;
everyone's attention was riveted on Gul'dan and the draenei prisoners. "Yes, t knew. I was there when we captured them. It is the
way of such things. Durotan."
"It did not use to be the way of the ores." Durotan replied.
"It is now." Orgrim said. "It is a sad necessity. For what it is worth, I do not believe that this will become a common practice. The
goal is to slay the draenei, not torment them."
Durotan stared at his old friend. Orgrim kept the gaze for a moment, then flushed and looked away. Durotan felt his outrage abate
somewhat. At least Orgrim understood what a violation this was. even if he supported it. But what else could Orgrim have done? He was second in
command to Blackhand. He was oath-bound to support his chieftain. Like Durotan, he had responsibilities to others he simply
could not shirk. For the first time in his life, Durotan wished he were a mere clan member.
He looked down into his mate's eyes. She stared, aghast, first at him and then at Orgrim. And then, he saw the sorrow and
resignation flit across her features and she lowered her head.
"These beings have worth to us in this moment," Gul'dan was saying. Durotan. his body feeling heavy as lead, dragged his gaze to
the shaman. "We will use them to demonstrate these new powers."
He nodded to the first Blackrock shaman in line, who bowed. Looking slightly nervous, the female closed her eyes and
concentrated. A sound like rushing wind filled Durotan's cars. A strange pattern written in purple light appeared at her feet,
encircling her. Above her head, a purple cube turned idly. Then, suddenly, a small, squawking creature appeared at her feet. It capered, its eyes blazing red, its small but sharp teeth bared in what looked like a smile. Durotan heard mur-murings and some
hisses of fear.
Other shaman followed suit, summoning the same eerie purple circles and cubes, manifesting creatures seemingly out of thin air.
Some were large, shapeless things in hues of blue and purple, hovering ominously. Other beings were fair to look upon, save for
their hooved feet and batlikc wings. Some were large, some small, and all sat or stood quietly beside those who had called them
into being.
"Pretty little pets, to be sure," came the distinctive voice of Grom Hcllscrcam, dripping with sarcasm. "But what do they do?"
Gul'dan smiled indulgently. "Patience, Hcllscrcam," he said, almost condescendingly. "It is a strength, not a weakness."
Hcllscrcam's brows drew together, but he stayed silent. He was as curious as anyone, Durotan assumed. Blackhand stood, smiling
a little, looking like a proud father. Only he seemed unsurprised by what was unfolding here, and Durotan realized that he must
have already witnessed the powers of the newly trained shaman. Witnessed, and approved.
One of the draenei was cut loose from the rest and shoved forward. His hands still bound, he stumbled a few steps on his cloven
feet, then stood erect. His face was impassive. Only his slowly moving tail gave any indication of stress.
The first shaman stepped forward, moving her hands and murmuring slightly. The little creature at her side squawked and jumped
about, then suddenly fire erupted from its clawed hands to slam into the hapless draenei. At the same moment, a ball of... darkness
... formed at the shaman's fingertips and rushed toward the prisoner. It grunted in pain as its blue flesh was
blackened and burned from the small creature's attack, but it dropped to its knees in obvious agony as the shadow ball struck it.
Again the shaman muttered something, and flames erupted from the very flesh of the tortured draenei. Where before he had been
stoic and silent, now he screamed in torment, his cries muffled somewhat by the gag in his throat, but not completely. He jerked
and spasmed on the earth, flailing like a fish freshly hooked, his eyes rolling wildly. Then he was still. The reck of burned flesh
filled the air.
For a moment, there was silence. Then came a sound that Durotan had never thought to hear: cries of approval and delight at the
sight of a bound foe dying in helpless torment.
Durotan stared in horror. Another prisoner was slain for "demonstration purposes." This one was beaten with a whip by one of the
fairer servants of the shaman, standing transfixed while fire rained upon it, and darkness pummclcd it, A third was brought forward, its magical essence sucked out of it by a monstrous creature that looked like a deformed wolf with tentacles sprouting from
its back.
Bile rose in Durotan's throat as blue blood and ashes covered what once had been sacred land, land that had been and was even
now lush and fertile, though its profound sense of tranquility had been brutally violated. Here he had danced, had sung to the
moon, had conspired with a boyhood friend, had courted his beloved. Here generations of ores had celebrated their unity on a
place so holy that any fights that broke out had been halted immediately, the combatants ordered to make peace or to depart.
Durotan was no shaman. He could not sense the earth or the spirits, but he did not need to in order to feel their pain as his own.
Mother Kashur, surely, surely this is not what you wanted, he thought. The cheering filled his cars, the stench of blood and
charred flesh assaulted his nostrils. Worst of all was the sight of his brethren, even some among his own clan, who were caught up
in the frenzy of inflicting pain and torment upon beings who were rendered incapable of even spitting on their opponents.
He was dimly aware of his hand hurting. Somewhat in a daze, he looked down to see that Draka was clenching it so hard she
threatened to break the bones.
"For the shaman!" cried someone.
"No!" Gul'dan's voice carried over the noise of the cheering crowd. "No longer are they shaman. They were abandoned by the
elements—they will call them no longer and beg for their aid. Behold those who have power, and who are not afraid to wield it.
Behold , . . the warlocks!"
Durotan tore his gaze from his fingers entwining with his mate's to look up at the sacred mountain. It jutted serenely skyward as it
ever had, its sides catching and reflecting the light, and for a long moment, Durotan wondered why it did not shatter and break,
like the heart of a sentient being, overcome with horror at what was being done in its once-comforting shadow.
There were wild celebrations that night. Durotan participated in none of them and forbade members of his clan to do so. As the
Frostwolf shaman sat by their small fire, subdued and eating in silence, Drek’Thar dared ask the question that Durotan knew was
in their hearts.
"My chieftain," said Drek’Thar quicdy, "will you permit us to learn the ways of the warlocks?"
There was a long silence, unbroken save by the crackling of the fire. Finally Durotan spoke.
"I have a question for you first." he said. "Do you approve of what was done to the prisoners today?"
Drek’Thar looked uncomfortable. "It . . . would be better had we attacked them in honest combat." he admitted. "But they are our
enemies. They have proven that."
"Proven that they will fight back when attacked." Durotan retorted. "That is all that has been proven." Drek’Thar started to protest,
but Durotan waved him to be silent. "I know, this is the will of the ancestors, but today I beheld something that I never thought I
would sec. I saw the sacred fields where for countless years our people met in peace defiled by the blood of those who couldn't
even lift a hand to defend themselves."
He saw movement at the edge of the circle and caught Orgrim's scent. Durotan continued. "In the shadow of Oshu'gun itself Those
who slew the draenei today did not do so in order to protect an immediate threat to our lands. They butchered prisoners in order to
show off their new . .. talents/'
Orgrim now coughed quietly and Durotan motioned him forward. Orgrim was well known to all present, and he sat down by the
fire with the familiarity of one known and welcomed.
"Orgrim," Draka said, touching her friend's arm gently. "The first.. . warlocks . .. are from your clan. What are your thoughts?"
Orgrim stared into the firelight, his heavy brows knitted together as he sorted through his thoughts. "If we are to fight the
draenei—and even you Frostwolves are resigned to the necessity of it—then we should fight to be victorious. The elements have
abandoned the shaman. They are fickle and unpredictable at their best, and were never the most reliable allies. Not like one's
friends."
He glanced at Durotan and smiled a little. Despite the heaviness in his chest, Durotan smiled back.
"These new creatures, these strange powers—they seem to be more dependable. And destructive."
"There was something about them...." Draka's voice trailed off. Drek’Thar broke in quickly.
"Draka, I know your concerns. They were definitely not natural powers, at least not natural as we shaman have always known
them. But who is to say that is wrong? They exist, they must have some place in the order of things. Fire is fire. Whether it comes
from the
fingers of a little dancing being or with the spirit of fire's blessing, it burns flesh just the same. I agree with our esteemed guest.
We have committed to the battle. Surely we do not fight to lose it!"
Draka still shook her head, her beautiful eyes unhappy. Her hands moved as if she were physically groping for the words.
"It is more than summoning fire, or even the strange bolts of darkness," she said. "I have fought draenei. I have slain draenei. And
never have I seen them writhe in such pain, nor give voice to such torment. The things who are serving the warlocks seemed to . . .
enjoy that."
"We enjoy the hunt," Durotan pointed out. He disliked arguing with his mate, but as always, he needed to see all sides of an issue
in order to decide what was best for his clan. "The wolves enjoy feasting on steaming flesh."
"Is it wrong to wish to win?" Orgrim challenged, his gray eyes narrowing. "Is it wrong to take pleasure in the victory?"
"In the hunt, in the victory, no. It is the suffering of which I speak."
Drek’Thar shrugged. "Perhaps the beings who are summoned to serve feed on that. Perhaps it is necessary to their existence."
"But is it necessary to ours?" Draka's eyes glittered in the firelight, and Durotan knew with a pang that it was not from anger but
from tears of frustration. "The draenei have always had superior magics to ours, even with the aid of the elements." Drek’Thar
said. "I have always been a shaman. I was born so. And now I tell you I will embrace the path of the warlock, if my clan leader
will permit it. Because I understand what those powers can do for us, having dealt with the elements for as long as I have. I would
say, Draka, I am sorry, but yes—yes—this is necessary to our existence. If we do not have the powers of the elements to call
upon, the draenei will obliterate us from the face of the earth."
Draka sighed and buried her face in her hands. The small group was silent, the only sound the crackling of the fire. Durotan
thought something was missing; now he knew. He did not hear the sounds of the night creatures, the birds and insects and other
living things who formerly filled the air with quiet sounds. They had been driven from this place by what had occurred here
earlier. He tried not to think of this as an omen.
"I will permit the Frostwolf clan to learn these arts," he said heavily.
Drek’Thar bowed his head. "I thank you, Durotan. You will not regret it."
Durotan did not reply.
FOURTEEN
Drek’Thar weeps as he tells me of these things, tears fallingfrom eyes tliat can no longer see the present but too keenly can see the
past. I have no comfort to offer him. That the elements have come again to his call—to mine—indeed to that of any orcish shaman
is testimony to their compassion and forgiveness, their desire to see the balance restored.
The Spire that still houses darkness is not on this continent. We are well away from its malevolence physically, but not yet out of
its shadow. The shadow that was cast so long ago, on the day following the defiling of what had once been our most sacred place.
The shadow of a black hand.
Sleep did not come easily to Durotan. Nor, he realized, to Draka, as she tossed and turned and sighed. Finally he gave up and lay
awake, going over die events of the day. Everything in him screamed that it was wrong to embrace a magical path that so blatantly
throve on the suffering of another being. And yet, what else was there to do? The elements had deserted the shaman, even though
the ancestors themselves had given the ores this task. Without magic to use as an additional weapon, the ores would be wiped out
by the superior technology and knowledge of the draenei.
He rose and left the sleeping tent. He started a fire to shake off the predawn chill and silently ate cold raw meat. As he broke his
fast and watched the sky lighten, he saw a courier approaching. Without stopping, the rider tossed a scroll to Durotan and rode on.
Durotan unfolded it and closed his eyes at the contents.
There was to be another meeting in two days. At that time, the chieftains would elect a leader who would speak for them all. Make
decisions for them all. They would select one who would be called Warchief.
A soft hand stroked his hair. He looked up to see Draka reading over his shoulder.
"You might as well stay home," she said gruffly. "The outcome is decided anyway."
He smiled sadly at her. "You did not use to be so cynical, beloved."
"I did not use to live in such times,'' was all she said. In his heart, he knew she was right. There was only one orc who was wellknown enough, charismatic enough to win sufficient votes to be elected Warchief. Grom Hcllscrcam might give Blackhand a bit
of a challenge, but Hcllscrcam was too impulsive to be trusted
with such a task. Blackhand had been a visible figure from the very start, at first opposing and then supporting Ner’zhul. It was his
shaman who had become the first warlocks. He had won more victories in his attacks against the draenei than anyone else.
Draka, as she was so often, was right in this as well. And two days later, Durotan watched with dull eyes as the votes of the clan
chieftains were tallied, and as Blackhand of the Blackrock clan was chosen. He felt several glances come his way as Blackhand's
name was announced by Gul'dan, and as the big orc stood and with false modesty accepted the title. Durotan did not even bother
to object. What would be the point? He was already being watched closely for suspicion of disloyalty. No word he could possibly
utter would change anything.
At one point, he looked over at Orgrim. To all other eyes, the second in command of the Blackrock clan looked steady and
supportive of his leader. But Durotan knew Orgrim better than anyone, and he saw the slight frown that furrowed his friend's
brow, the tightness around the lips that indicated that Orgrim was perhaps as unhappy with the decision as Durotan. But he, too,
was in no position to object. Durotan hoped that perhaps Orgrim's position, so close to Blackhand, would help mitigate the
damage he was certain Blackhand would do.
Blackhand now stood in front, waving and smiling at the cheering crowd. Durotan could not object, but ncithcr could he bring
himself to cheer for an orc who exemplified everything he despised.
Orgrim stood behind his leader on Blackhand's right. Gul'dan. whom Durotan was certain was manipulating things but was unsure
as to how, stood back and gazed at Blackhand respectfully.
"My orcish brothers and sisters!" Blackhand cried. "You honor me, I will prove a worthy Warchief of this vast sea of noble
warriors. Day by day. we improve our weapons and our armor. And now, we reject the unpredictable elements and embrace true
power—power that our warlocks control and wield without groveling or scraping to anyone or anything. This is liberation! This is
strength! We are of one purpose, one clear focus. We will wipe the draenei from our lands. They will be unable to resist this tide
of warriors and warlocks, this sweeping Horde. We are their worst night-marc. To battle!"
He lifted his arms and shouted, "For the Horde!"
And thousands of impassioned voices cried, "For the Horde! For the Horde! For the HorAeV
Durotan and Draka returned home shordy after the election of Blackhand, too disgusted to remain longer. The shaman stayed
behind for training. When they returned several days later, Durotan saw they stood tall and proud once again. This new magic had
given them back their faith in themselves—something that had evaporated like morning mist when the elements deserted them. For that, Durotan was grateful. He loved his clan, and knew them to be good people. He did not like seeing them
broken and disheartened.
They practiced their skills on beasts at first, joining the hunting parties and sending their strange creatures after clefthoof and
talbuk. Durotan was still troubled at the agony the attacked creatures suffered. As time passed, the creatures suffered less—not
because the pain was decreased, but because the warlocks were learning to kill faster and more efficiently. The addition of the
strange "helpers," or "pets," as some warlocks fondly referred to the beings firmly under their control, seemed to make alt the
difference.
Blackhand seemed to enjoy his newfound position. Scrolls came almost daily from couriers whose wolves and whose selves
seemed to wear more ornate adornment each time they rode into camp. Durotan had to admit that knowing what was going on
with the other clans was useful information.
But one day, someone other than the courier came into the encampment. Durotan recognized the raiment; the approaching ore,
mounted on a wolf with a particularly glossy black cloak, was one of Blackhand's personal warlocks, Kur'kul. He halted his wolf,
dismounted, and bowed before Durotan.
"Chieftain, a word with you from the Warchief," he said in a surprisingly pleasant voice. Durotan nodded and motioned that the
warlock walk with him. They strode until he felt certain they would not be overheard. "What is it, that Blackhand sends one of his
most important warlocks to mc?" he asked.
Kur'kul smiled around his tusks. "I am riding to all the clans," he said, clearly intending for Durotan to be put in his place. The
Frostwolves were not being particularly honored, it would seem. Durotan grunted and folded his arms across his chest, waiting.
"The most important factor in our eventual and glorious victory over the draenei is numbers," Kur'kul continued. "They are few,
we are many. But we need to be more."
"So what is it Blackhand wishes?" growled Durotan. "Shall we leave off fighting for mating?"
Kur'kul did not blink. "Not leave off fighting, but yes . . . encourage your warriors to procreate. You will receive accolades for
each child that is born to your clan. That will help. But unfortunately, we need more warriors right now, not six years from now."
Durotan stared, stunned. He had meant the comment as a crude joke. What was going on?
"Children begin training at age six," Kur'kul continued. "They are strong enough to fight at age twelve. Summon all your
younglings."
"I do not understand," Durotan said. "Summon them for what?"
Kur'kul sighed as if Durotan were a foolish child, "I have the ability to accentuate their growth," he said. "We will. . . push them
forward a bit. If we take all the children that are between six and twelve now and age
them to twelve, we will increase the numbers of warriors on the field by almost fifty percent."
Durotan couldn't believe what he was hearing. 'Absolutely not!"
"I'm afraid it's not a choice. It's an order. Any clan who refuses will be branded a traitor to the Horde. The clan will be exiled, and
their leader and his mate ... executed."
Durotan stared, stunned. Kur'kul handed him a scroll. He read it, shaking with anger, and saw that the warlock had spoken truly.
He and Draka would be put to death, and the Frostwolf clan exiled.
"You would rob them of their childhood, then," he said stonily.
"For their future? Yes. I will drain a little of their lives . , . only six years' worth. They will come to no harm. The Blackrock
children certainly didn't. Black-hand insisted his own three young ones be the first to be so honored. And in return, they will be
able to fight for the glory of the Horde now, when they can make a difference."
Durotan was not in the least surprised that Black-hand had permitted this to be done to his children. For the first time, Durotan
was grateful that there were so few children in his clan. There were only five of them older than six and younger than twelve. He
again read the missive, feeling furious and sickened at the same time. These children ought to be able to simply be children. The
warlock waited calmly. Finally. Durotan said in a voice he made deliberately harsh to hide his pain, "Do what you must do."
"For the Horde!" said Kur'kul.
Durotan did not reply.
What happened next was barbaric.
Durotan forced himself to remain impassive while Kur'kul cast a spell on the five Frostwolf children. They writhed in pain,
screaming and flailing on the earth as bones were stretched, as skin and muscle burst into unnatural growth. A sickly green line
linked the children to the warlock, as if he was sucking the very life out of them. The expression on Kur'kul's face was ecstatic. If
the children were suffering, he most definitely was not. For an awful moment, Durotan feared the warlock would not stop at age
twelve, but would continue draining life from the children until they were shriveled and ancient.
But thankfully, Kur'kul did stop. The young ores— children no longer—lay where they had dropped the instant the draining had
begun. For long moments, they could not be roused, and when they did, they wept, softly, brcathily, as if they no strength left for
anything else.
Durotan turned toward the warlock. "You have done what you have come for. Get out."
Kur'kul looked offended. "Chieftain Durotan, you—"
Durotan seized him by the front of his scarlet robe. Fear flickered across the other ore's face.
"Get out. Now."
Durotan shoved hard and Kur'kul stumbled backward, almost falling. He glowered at Durotan.
"Blackhand will not be pleased to hear of this," Kur'kul growled. Durotan did not dare speak; if any other words came from his
mouth, he knew they would doom his clan. Instead he turned away, shaking with rage, and went to the children who were children
no longer.
For some time after that, nothing was asked of the Frostwolf clan save more intensive training and reporting back on that training,
and Durotan was both relieved and apprehensive. Somehow, he knew that when Blackhand and Gul'dan chose to notice him, the
task they would set for him would be a difficult one.
He would not be disappointed.
Durotan was looking at a new pattern for armor the smith had just drawn up when the wolfridcr loped into the Frostwolf
encampment. Without breaking stride, the rider tossed Durotan a parchment, wheeled his mount around, and departed. Durotan
unrolled it and began to read, his eyes widening. He looked up quickly at the departing figure of the rider—it was not the official
courier.
Old friend—
I am sure it comes as no surprise that you are being watched. They will set a task for you, one that they know you can complete.
You must do so. I do not know what they will do if you refuse, but I fear the worst.
There was no signature; the missive did not need one. Durotan knew Orgrim's bold script. He crumpled the parchment and tossed
it into the fire, watching it twist and curl in on itself like a living thing as the flames licked and consumed it.
Orgrim had sent the warning just in time. That very afternoon, a rider wearing the official tabard of a courier approached and
handed the Frostwolf chieftain a parchment. Durotan nodded as he accepted it and put it aside. He did not want to see it right now.
But the courier looked uneasy. She did not dismount, but neither did she turn her wolf and ride back to the Frostwolf lands.
"I have been instructed to wait for a reply," she said after an awkward pause.
Durotan nodded and unrolled the parchment. The writing was exquisite, and he knew that Blackhand had dictated the missive; the
Warchief, smart and cunning though he was, was barely literate.
It was worse than he had thought. Durotan kept his face carefully neutral, though out of the corner of his eye he saw that Draka
was watching him carefully.
Unto Durotan, son of Garad, chieftain of the Frostwolf clan, Blackhand, Warchief of the Horde, gives greetings.
You have now had time to see the skills of our newly trained warlocks in action. It is time to take the attack to our enemies. The
draenei city of Telmor is close to your borders. You are instructed to form a war party and attack them. Orgrim has told me that
as boys, the two of you entered that city. That you saw the secret of how the draenei kept themselves unseen. Orgrim also tells me
that you have excellent recall and that you would remember how to expose the city to our warriors for an assault.
I'm sure I don't have to tell you what destroying this city would mean to the Horde. And to the Frostwolf dan. Reply to this letter
immediately and we will begin preparations for the assault.
For the Horde!
The signature was an imprint of Blackhand's right hand, stained with ink.
Durotan was furious. How could Orgrim have revealed this information? Did he truly follow Blackhand after all, that he would
tell the Warchief of this incident and so put Durotan on the spot? The anger ebbed as he realized that the information to which
Blackhand referred—their visit there as boys, the way the city was hidden, Durotan's almost uncanny memory—these were things
that could have been dropped in conversation at any point over the last few years. Blackhand was intelligent enough to pick up
any crumb of information, and hoard it until such time as it was necessary. Durotan thought about lying, about claiming that he
could not recall the words by which Restalaan had dispelled the illusion that kept die draenei city safe and hidden from the eyes of
the ogres . . . and. now, the eyes of the ores. It had been a long time, and he had only heard the phrase uttered once. Anyone else
would indeed have forgotten it. But the threat in die letter was so thinly veiled as to be almost ridiculous. If Durotan agreed to
assist with the attack, he would prove his loyalty to the Horde, to Blackhand, and to Gul'dan. at least for the moment. If he
refused, even if he claimed not to recall the words Blackhand wanted him to speak . . . well, like Orgrim, Durotan feared the
worst.
The courier was waiting.
Durotan made the onlv decision he could make.
J
He looked up at the courier, his face impassive. "I will do as the Warchief bids, of course. For the Horde!"
The courier looked both relieved and a little surprised. "The Warchief will be pleased to hear this. I am instructed to give you the
following." She reached into her leather backpack and retrieved a small sack, which she handed to Durotan. "Your warriors and
your warlocks will need to train with these."
Durotan nodded. He knew what they were: the Heart of Fury and the Brilliant Star that he had ordered taken off Velen. These
stones were perhaps the only things that had spared him once before when he had incurred Ner’zhul's anger. Now, he would use
them against the very people he had taken them from.
"The Warchief will contact you soon," the courier said, inclined her head, and turned her wolf. Durotan watched her go. Draka
stepped quietly beside him. He handed her the letter and went into their tent.
A few moments later she joined him, slipping her arms around him from behind while he buried his face in his hands and grieved
over the events that had led to the terrible decision he had been forced to make.
A few days later the war party gathered at the Frostwolf encampment. Most of the warriors and warlocks were from the Blackrock
clan, but there were more than a few painted Warsong faces in the crowd, and several Shattered Hand as well. Even the most
obtuse among the Frostwolves could sense the mistrust and contempt from the visitors. Durotan knew it was no accident that the
other ores were all from the most martial clans. They were there to make sure the Frostwolves did not falter at any critical point.
Durotan idly wondered which among them had the instructions to slit his throat at the first sign of hesitation. He hoped it was not
Orgrim, The two old friends exchanged only a few words, and Durotan saw regret in Orgrim's visage. For that, at least, he was
glad.
A courier had been sent ahead, so there were plenty of bonfires roaring and food and drink for the hungry "guests," Many of the
Frostwolves gave up their own lodging for the visitors, so that those who would head into battle the following morning would rest
as well as possible. Durotan met with Orgrim and the others who would lead the assault, sketching out a layout of the city as best
he and Orgrim could recall it.
By daybreak, the war party—a small army of ores— was on the move. They passed into the meadows that surrounded the
Terokkar forest, where so long ago Orgrim and Durotan had raced as youths and been startled by the appearance of an ogre.
No lumbering giants troubled the vast wave of ores as they moved steadily toward their destination this morning. Durotan was in
the front, riding beside Orgrim on Nightstalkcr. They were silent, but Durotan did not miss the fact that Orgrim's gray eyes
lingered on the site where two boys had been rescued by draenei warriors.
"The years have been long since we passed this way," Durotan said.
Orgrim nodded. "I am not even sure we have the right direction. The forest and fields have changed and grown, and there were
precious few landmarks originally-''
Durotan said heavily, "I remember the way." He wished he did not. A pile of stones here, a strange-shaped outcropping there was
enough to guide him. It looked like nothing to anyone else. Blackhand had told his troops that the draenei were able to disguise
their city. Even so, Durotan's sharp cars caught slight murmurings of concern. He frowned.
"We are drawing close," he said. "We must be quiet.
There is an excellent chance that We will have been seen and reported already."
The war party grew silent then. With a few gestures, Orgrim dispatched some of his outriders to scout the area. Durotan's mind
went back to that twilight, when he, too, was worried about where they were going and what the draenei had planned for him.
He brought his wolf to a halt and dismounted. Nightstalkcr shook his head and scratched his cars absently. It was here ... or close
to here. . . . Durotan felt a desperate hope that perhaps the draenei remembered that they had exposed their secret to him, that they
had changed the hiding place of the magical stone upon which their protection depended.
There was no telltale rock beneath which the green gem was secreted. Durotan's memory would have no aid in uncovering it. He
concentrated, walking slowly, hearing the jangling of tack and the soft clinking of armor as the others watched and waited. He
closed his eyes to aid his concentration, saw again Restalaan kneeling on the ground, moving aside leaves and pine needles to
uncover—
Durotan opened his eyes and moved a few steps to his left. He said a quick prayer to the ancestors; whether it was asking for help
in finding the stone or in not finding it, he was not certain. Mailed hands reached down and brushed away layers of detritus and
then touched something cool and hard.
There is no turning back now. Durotan closed his fingers around the gem and picked it up.
Even in his distraught state of mind, he could sense the stone emanating a comforting energy. It nestled in his palm as if it
belonged there. Durotan ran his left index finger over it, drawing out this moment before everything would change irrevocably
"You found it." breathed Orgrim. who had silently stepped up to his friend. Durotan was overcome with emotion and could not
speak for a moment. He merely nodded, then tore his gaze from the beautiful, pulsating stone and looked up at the awestruck faces
gazing at the treasure he held.
Orgrim nodded brusquely. "Get into position," he said, "We have been fortunate that there has been no advance warning."
The stone was so calming to hold, Durotan wanted nothing better than to simply stand and look into its depths, but he knew that
he had already made his choice. He took a deep breath and spoke the words that Restalaan had spoken so long ago in this same
place.
"Kehla men samir, solay Uimaa kahl."
He wanted to believe that his thick, orcish accent would not activate the stone. That he was able to fulfill his obligation to his
people without storming a small city full of civilians. But apparently the words were understood by whatever force controlled the
green gem. The illusion was already dissipating, the trees and boulders shimmering into insubstantiality, and before the orcish war
party a wide, paved road stretched as if in invitation.
They needed no urging. The glorious city of the draenei lay before them, and with cries torn from over a
hundred throats, the ores descended upon it.
FIFTEEN
Drek'Thar speaks in a broken voice of glories ruined, of beauty destroyed, of the slaughter of children. Through his tale runs the
unspoken excuse: It seemed so right at the time. / imagine it did seem right. It did seem just. I can only pray to the ancestors that I
am never placed in the same position as my father—torn between what I know in my heart is right and the defense of my people. It
is why I continue to strive to uphold the tenuous peace between us and the Alliance.
Because few offenses and insults in this or any other world are sufficient to warrant the slaughter of children.
Later, Durotan would wonder how the city of Telmor had received no advance notice of a wave of mounted ores. He would never
be able to speak with a draenei to find out. He could only assume that the draenei were so certain in their Hlusionary camouflage
that the idea that it could be breached never occurred to them.
The quiet air was rent with the sound of war cries and wolf howls as the riders stormed the streets of the city. Several unarmed
draenei were cut down in the first few seconds of the assault. The white pavement was soon blue with spilled blood, but it did not
take very long for the city guards to counterattack.
Durotan had shoved the stone into his pack the moment he had finished using it; it would join the red and yellow stones he had
taken from Velen. He mounted quickly and rode with grim determination, his axe at the ready. While he had made his own private
vow that he would not attack an unarmed foe or a child, he had also made his choice, and was prepared to kill or die for it.
The first wave flooded the city. A river of ores forked into streams, pouring into the large, spherical public buildings that branched
off to cither side of the main street, surging up the wide stone steps. The warlocks brought up the rear. Their creatures were silent
and obedient, save the small ones that muttered constantly under their breaths. They waited for the right moments to bring down
the rain of fire, the bolt of shadows, the various curses of torment. The warriors emerged covered with blood, their boots tracking
it down the wide steps as they continued on to the next building, and the next.
The draenei guards were in the streets now, casting their own magics. Durotan turned in his saddle barely in time to deflect a blow
from a sword that blazed with blue energy. The sword clanged against the head of his axe and jarred his arm to the bone. But that
was nothing compared to the shock he felt at recognizing his attacker.
For the second time, he and Restalaan were meeting in battle, Durotan had spared Velen, and in return. Restalaan had spared him
when he was helpless before the draenei warrior. Durotan saw recognition in the other's eyes, then those glowing blue orbs
narrowed.
All debts between them were paid. This time, there would be no quarter given, on cither side.
Restalaan cried something in his musical tongue. Instead of attacking again, he hauled Durotan from his saddle. Durotan was
taken by surprise, and before he knew what was happening, he lay on the ground before his enemy. He reached for his axe as
Restalaan swung his sword, thinking even as his fingers closed about the hilt that he would not be swift enough.
Nightstalkcr, however, was trained almost as well as the orc who rode him. The instant the wolf felt his rider leave his back he
whirled on Restalaan. Huge teeth crunched down on the draenei's arm. Had it not been for the protective armor Restalaan wore,
his arm would have been severed instantly. As it was, the pressure was enough to cripple him and make him drop the sword. With
a grunt, Durotan swung his axe as hard as he could. It slammed into Restalaan's midsection, its keen edge cleaving through ihc
armor to bite deep into his flesh.
Restalaan fell to his knees, his useless arm still held fast by Nightstalkcr's teeth. The white wolf bit down harder, growling, and
started worrying the draenei's
arm as if it were a small animal. Within moments, the wolf would rip it off. Blood gushed from the wound in Restalaan's side. He
made no sound despite the agony he must be enduring.
Durotan got to his feet and struck again, this time a killing blow—a mercy blow. Restalaan sagged and Nightstalkcr immediately
let go of the arm. The captain of the guards of Telmor was dead.
Durotan did not permit himself regret. He mounted Nightstalkcr quickly and sought out his next target. There was no lack of them.
The city was certainly not the size of Shattrath, their capital, but it was big enough. There were draenei aplenty to slaughter. The
air was filled with cries of bioodlust, of pain and fear, of the clanging of sword on shield and the crackle of spells being cast.
Odors assaulted his nostrils, of blood and feces and urine and the unmistakable, unique reck of terror.
The rage boiling inside him felt good. His senses had never been higher, and he seemed to move without thinking. Over there—
another one of the guards, fighting Orgrim. Durotan tensed, thinking to rush to his friend's aid, but the Doomhammer swung
through the air and crushed the attacker's skull even through his helm. Durotan grinned fiercely. Orgrim needed no aid.
He sensed the presence at his side before he heard or smcllcd it, and turned, bellowing his clan's war cry. He hoisted the gorecovered axe and prepared to bring it down. The child was barely out of puberty, but she screamed in fury as she tore with bare
hands at his ar-morcd leg. Tears streamed down her pale blue face and her teeth were bared. Blue blood, too much of it to be her
own, saturated her dress so that it clung to her body. She pounded futilely at him, her tear-filled eyes burning with pain and
righteous fury
For a horrible second she seemed to be the same girl that Durotan and Orgrim had encountered years ago. That could not be—
surely that girl was a woman grown now. Or was she? But it did not matter. It was a female child who, both bravely and stupidly,
was attempting to attack a mounted orc warrior with her bare hands.
It was with an enormous effort that Durotan halted the axe in mid-swing. He would not harm a child—that was not the code, that
was not the way of the ores—
Suddenly the girl froze. Her eyes widened. She opened her mouth and blood gushed forth, Durotan's gaze dropped from her face
to her chest, and he could see the spear point tenting the blood-soaked fabric. Before Durotan could react, the Shattered Hand orc
who had slain the girl shoved the spear to the side, forcing the body to the earth. He put one booted foot on her shoulder.
Grunting, he pulled loose his spear and grinned up at Durotan.
"You owe me one, Frostwolf," the orc said, then vanished into the close-pressing crowd of slayers and victims.
Durotan threw back his head and cried his agony to the ancestors.
On surged the orcs,leaving corpses in their wake. The vast majority of the dead were draenei, but here and there a brown body of a
fallen orc could be seen. Some of the ores who fell yet lived, crying out for aid, but their pleas fell on deaf cars. Shaman could
have healed them with spells, but apparently, warlock magics did not embrace the healing arts. So they lay where they had fallen,
some wheezing out their last breaths next to the draenei they had slain, while the unstoppable tide poured forward.
They followed the road through the foothills, entering each building as they went and slaughtering anyone they found. No doubt
some draenei had hidden, Durotan thought, and prayed they would not be found. He did not think that prayer would be answered.
Once the first round of slaughter had been completed, there would be the looting and the search for those who had escaped the
first assault. He knew. It had been planned thus.
They had reached the largest building yet, the one that sat highest on the mountain, and Durotan recognized it immediately. It was
the magistcr's scat, where he and Orgrim had had dinner with the Prophet. Bitterly he thought that Velen was not much of a
prophet if he had not foreseen this black moment. Nightstalkcr raced up the steps, and Durotan could not help himself. He craned
his neck and looked over his shoulder, back down toward the city as he had done the first time he had climbed these steps on his
own two feet.
Then, the draenei city had been spread out like jewels on a meadow. Now. it looked exactly like what it was—a broken, taken
city, spattered with blood and gore and the death not just of its citizens, but of any hope of peace or truce or negotiation. Durotan
closed his eyes briefly in pain.
/ am proud of my people and our city, Restalaan had said to Durotan. Restalaan. who lay dead and stiffening on the white street
along with countless other draenei. We have worked hard here. We love Draenor. And I never thought to have the chance to share
it with an ore. The ways of destiny are strange indeed.
Stranger than cither orc youth or draenei guard could have imagined.
The rooms that had made two orc youths feel slightly penned in years ago now seemed utterly claustrophobic when crammed with
adult orc warriors by the dozens. Most were empty; there had been time for an evacuation of all but those who had sworn to die in
service to their city. And die they did, the guards who attacked them now. The beautiful, ornate furniture was used as weapons,
brought crashing down upon draenei heads, the breakage adding to the thrill of the fight. Ores punched holes in the smooth,
curving walls for the sheer pleasure of it. Beds were hacked with swords, bowls of fruit and delicately wrought statuettes swept
off furniture that was in turn smashed by axe or hammer.
Durotan had had enough. "Hold!" he cried, but no one listened. The creatures controlled by the warlocks seemed well pleased with
this behavior, almost smug. But the time for destruction had passed, and the ruthless savagery would not serve the ores now that
all the inhabitants of Telmor were cither slain or had fled.
"Hold!" Durotan yelled again. This time Orgrim heard him and took up the cry. The Warsong representative also shook his head,
as if to clear it of something hazy and obscuring, then he, too. tried to calm his warriors. Drek’Thar, back with the other warlocks,
had not become as lost in bloodlust as the others, and he was able to stop the others from casting spells.
"Listen to me!" Durotan roared. Most of them had reached the room where Velen had hosted them at his table. The room was
empty, die chairs and tables overturned, the wall hangings shredded and cast to the floor.
"We have taken the city, it is now time to take what we need from it!"
They were listening now, their breaths coming in pants that filled the room with raspy sound. But at least they had stopped
swinging their weapons at anything that moved ... or even anything that didn't.
"First we attend to the injured," Durotan ordered. "We will not leave our brethren to suffer in the streets."
Some of them started guiltily at that. Durotan realized with disgust that many of these warriors had completely forgotten that some
of their number still lay writhing in pain outside while they enjoyed die wanton destruction of the magister's estate. He pushed his
feelings down and nodded to Drek’Thar. The warlocks might no longer have healing spells, but they had once been shaman, and
knew how to tend battle wounds in a more mundane fashion. Drek’Thar motioned to several warlocks, and they hurried back the
way they had come.
"Next, this city has supplies the likes of which we have never seen. There are foodstuffs aplenty, and weapons, and armor, and
other things we know not of. Things that will serve the Horde in its quest to—"
He could not say the words he had planned: In its quest to wipe out the draenei. Instead he added somewhat awkwardly, "In its
quest. We are an army. An army marches on its stomach. We need to be well led, well watered, healed, rested, protected.
Orgrim—you take a group and start at this end. Guthor, you take a group and head back to the gates. Work your way up the main
road until you meet Orgrim's group. Anyone who has any healing knowledge, report to Drek’Thar and do exactly what he tells
you to do."
"What of any draenei we find alive?" asked someone.
What, indeed? There was no infrastructure to take care of prisoners, and in truth, the only purpose of a prisoner would be for
negotiations. Since it had been made quite clear that the sole purpose of the Horde was total extermination of the draenei race,
there was no reason to host prisoners.
"Kill them." Durotan said hoarsely. He hoped the raggedness of his voice would be interpreted as raw fury rather than the
agonizing pain it was. "Kill them all."
As the ores he commanded hurried to obey his orders, Durotan found himself wishing that Nightstalkcr had not been so quick to
protect him. It would have been easier had he perished by Restalaan's hand this day than speak the words he had just uttered.
With any luck, during this horrific campaign to obliterate a species who had never raised a hand to them, death
would find Durotan sooner rather than later.
SIXEEN
The Shadow Council. Even now, so many years on, we know so little about who they were and what they did. Gul'dan carried
many, many secrets to his grave. May he rot there in torment. It is difficult enough for me to understand how one or two may
become so corrupted that they would doom their descendants for power in their lifetimes; that there were so many—the number is
not even known for certain—is beyond the scope of my limited imagination.
Yet even these numbers would not have mattered had it not been for the demons who held them in their grasp. Their pain, I rejoice
in; what they did to others who obeyed them because they trusted them, I condemn with every fiber of my being.
"That was an excellent test," Kil’jaeden approved, smiling at his subjects, Gul'dan bowed, his eyes bright with his master's
approval. Ner’zhul hunkered down, his eyes on the floor. But even so. he was listening.
"I confess. I was surprised Durotan was able to carry out our orders," Gul'dan said. "I expected him to resist, or at least put
shackles on what his ores could and could not do. But the city lies claimed and broken, my lord. All the draenei who once lived
there are gone— most of them dead."
"'Most' is not good enough. Gul'dan. You know that."
Gul'dan flinched slightly at the criticism. He wondered, not for the first time, about the connection between Kil’jaeden and the
draenei. and why the Beautiful One so despised them. "It was our first attempt at taking the battle to them, rather than attacking
lone hunting parties. Great One." the warlock replied, a little surprised at his own daring. Kil’jaeden cocked his horned red head,
considered, then nodded.
"True. And there is yet time."
It had been several days since the fall of Telmor. Gul'dan, impressed with the job Durotan had done, had tried to give the city to
the Frostwolf clan as a reward, but Durotan had declined the offer. The Frostwolves, he stated, would continue to live in their
ancestral lands.
The Blackrocks. however, had not been so foolish. Blackhand and his family now slept in the beds where the magistcr of the city
had once slept. At first, the ores had not known what to make of the trappings of the draenei, but now they were beginning to
incorporate their victims' way of life into their own. They sat in chairs, ate at tables, analyzed and trained with draenei weaponry,
adapted the armor for bulkier orcish frames. Some of the females and not a few of the males of the Blackrock clan had taken to
wearing draenei clothing, incorporating it with traditional orcish tunics, robes, and breeches,
Gul'dan knew that many wondered why he or Ner’zhul had not taken the city for themselves. It was tempting, but Gul'dan had
been well advised by his master. Creature comforts were pleasant, but power was sweeter, and the less Gul'dan claimed for
himself publicly, the greater his reach would be in secret. Kil'jaeden would not let him down, as long as Gul'dan did his master's
work well. A few items were brought to this new place he called home—an enormous, circular table carved of wood inlaid with
softly glowing shells and stones, along with several beautiful chairs,
Gul'dan stepped forward to the massive table, running his hands over the polished surface, smiling to himself. All that remained
was to summon those whom Gul'dan had reason to believe would answer. Some names were immediately obvious to him. Others
came only with extended thought. But he had a list of names now that was long enough to be comprehensive, should enough to be
. .. managed.
Soon, sooner that he had even hoped, the Shadow Council would form. While on the outside. Gul'dan was advancing the ores as a
race, giving them power and eliminating the "enemy" that was the draenei, a
handful of ores almost as corrupt and power hungry as he would pull the strings.
It was not about the ores as a race.
It had never been about the ores as a race.
It was about power—getting it, wielding it, and keeping it. Ner’zhul had never understood that. He liked the power, but was not
willing to feed it the meat it craved. The end Kil’jaeden demanded.
Deceit, lies, manipulation—even Blackhand, who thought he was initiated into Gul'dan's ultimate schemes, hadn't grasped the
vastness of Gul'dan's ambitions. It was as huge as Kil’jaeden's desire to destroy the draenei. It was as enormous as the sky. as deep
as the oceans, and knife-sharp as hunger.
Gul'dan looked at Ner’zhul with contempt as the older orc who had once been a mentor sat huddled in a corner. His gaze traveled
to the blazing eyes of Kil’jaeden, and the great being nodded.
"Summon them." Kil’jaeden said. His lips parted in a smile, showing sharp white teeth. "They will come when you call. And they
will dance to your tune. I will see to that."
Allies.
They needed allies.
Gul'dan wondered how Kil’jaeden had not foreseen this. The orcs were mighty indeed, especially when controlled and directed
properly. The long months, over a year now, that this war had stretched had only made them more so. Their best brains had gotten
to work on understanding the technology of the draenei as best they could. Building had begun on a center fortress, which Gul'dan
called the Citadel, where a standing army could be conveniently quartered, trained, and equipped. The ores had never before attempted anything like this, and Gul'dan was proud that he had suggested the idea. There were warriors, there were shaman—now,
of course, warlocks—there were healers, there were craftsmen. The first three had clear roles and no lack of opportunity to
perform their duties. The craftsmen were contributing on a different level, creating the armor and weapons and buildings to
support those who had the glory of slaughtering draenei until their bodies were sticky with spilled blood.
Some would call these laborers a lower class of ore. Privately, Gul'dan felt that way himself. But he was wise enough to know that
their work, while hardly glamorous or likely to gain them recognition, was as necessary as a warrior's willingness to kill or a warlock's mastery of curses. Those who provided food, shelter, weapons—the warriors and warlocks would not get very far without
them. So Gul'dan had made a show of praising the craftsmen, the pleasant result being that they were inspired to work harder and
continually improve.
But even though every member of every clan was working as hard as he could—and Gul'dan had spies in each clan to make
certain of it—it was not going to be
enough. The taking of Telmor had been surprisingly easy, and the boost to morale was tremendous. But Gul'dan knew that the
Horde's victory was largely due to luck. No one in that sheltered city believed for a moment they would be discovered and overrun
in a matter of a few hours. They had thought themselves completely and utterly safe, protected by the magic of the green stone
Gul'dan had dubbed Leafshadow, which shielded them first from ogre eyes and then from orcish. That easy victory would not be
repeated. How would—
"Ogres," he said aloud, thoughtfully. He tapped one sharp-nailed finger against his jutting chin. "Ogres. . ."
"Absolutely not!" cried Blackhand. He dosed the distance between himself and Gul'dan in two strides, towering over the smaller
ore. It took every ounce of bravado Gul'dan had not to retreat from that fearsome face shoved to within an inch of his.
"Come now. Blackhand," Gul'dan soothed. "Calm yourself and listen to what I am saying. You will be the one to benefit most
from this, after all."
That got him. Blackhand growled, snorted, and stepped back. Gul'dan did his best not to look obviously relieved.
"They are filth," Blackhand grunted. "They have long been enemies of the ores. Longer than the draenei, and with better reason.
How is it that I will benefit?" Getting right to the point, Gul'dan thought with satisfaction. He had judged Blackhand properly.
"There are some who still mutter that you were not elected fairly." Gul'dan said. "If you succeed in this, it will only add more
glory to your name."
Blackhand's eyes narrowed. "Perhaps," he admitted. "But will the ores agree to this?"
Gul'dan permitted himself a smile. "They will if we tell them to," he replied,
Blackhand threw his head back and roared with laughter.
Orgrim shifted uneasily in his saddle as he glanced at his leader. When Blackhand had explained what he wanted to do, Orgrim
had erupted in protest. He had joined in countless hunting parties over the years to eliminate the ogre threat. More than most
orcs,with him it was personal. He had never ceased hating the fact that years ago, he had fled from one of the giant, lumbering,
thick-skulled creatures. And now Blackhand proposed this.
But Orgrim knew that whatever else his leader was—and he was many things that Orgrim did not like—he was a good strategist.
The plan was sound, if one could detach oneself emotionally from it. So he had agreed to lend his support.
Obtaining information had been tricky. The Blackrocks had captured three of the ogres and spent many a long night speaking in
sufficiently small words to get their point across before the deceptively pudgy things
understood what Theywanted and began to cooperate. Now every warrior, warlock, and healer from the entire enormous clan
stood prepared for battle.
The ogres had told them where their masters lurked and led them to this place—an opening at the foot of the Blade's Edge
mountain chain. They had made no attempt to hide themselves. Refuse littered the area outside, and there were plenty of large
bare ogre footprints going in and out. Even as Orgrim watched, he saw a small group of ogres trundling out into the daylight. No
doubt, they thought themselves safe, as the draenei in Telmor had before them; and no doubt, a year ago, they would have been
right. But much had changed since then. The ores were no longer groups of scattered clans, but a unified fighting force willing to
put aside an old grudge for a new hatred.
Blackhand was in front, flanked by the three ogres. Behind him were his sons. Rend and Maim, who spoke to one another in low
voices punctuated by the occasional rough giggle. Orgrim had been against allowing the boys to fight at first, but they had proven
to be stronger and better than one might think. They lacked their father's cunning, but they certainly had inherited his bloodthirst.
Grisclda, too, had been trained to fight, but she was not a natural the way the bovs were. Their
J J
names were appropriate. Their father shot them an angry look and they sobered at once.
Orgrim wondered if Blackhand would make a speech. He hoped not. Blackhand was at his best in action, not words, and his clan
was more than ready to follow him. To his relief, Blackhand looked over the sea of warriors, nodded once, and then gave the order
to attack.
The first wave charged, screaming wildly and pouring down the side of the foothills where Theyhad hidden. At first the ogres
were so confused at the sight of three of their own allying with the ores that they simply stood and let themselves be slaughtered.
Then, as their slow brains began to comprehend that they were under attack, they rallied. They still did not attack their fellow
ogres, who lumbered through their ranks to talk to the head of the guards stationed somewhere inside die cavern.
Orgrim was determined to enjoy the last authorized ogre-killing he was likely to taste, and swung the Doomhammer with
something akin to glee. His wolf was swift, and darted easily between the tree-trunk-thick legs of the ogre who raged impotently
and swung his club as fiercely as he could. He recalled how big they had seemed to him as a child. They were still big, but so was
he, now, and he wielded a legendary weapon with control and skill. He fractured the shin-bone of the ogre and it roared in agony.
Orgrim's wolf danced out of the way as the huge thing fell, making the earth tremble as it landed. It tried to get up, pushing its
bulk off the ground with its large, fat hands, but by then other Blackrocks had swarmed upon it. Faster even than Orgrim could
reckon, the ogre was dead and bleeding from over two dozen wounds.
Orgrim wheeled just in time to see one of the orcish warriors hurtling through the air. dead from a single blow from an ogre's
massive club. Growling. Orgrim gathered himself to charge the murdering creature when a cry of "Hold, hold!" brought him up
short.
It was testament to the power of Blackhand's personality that even now, even when most of the Blackrocks were caught in the grip
of bloodlust and killing an ancient enemy, they stayed their hands. The ogres didn't, at least not at once, and Orgrim found himself
riding away from the battle until the slow ogre brains understood what was going on. The thought galled him. It is for the good of
all of us, Orgrim, he told himself.
He glanced over to see the ogres the Blackrocks had befriended talking to their kind. Or, rather, bellowing at them and
occasionally smacking them. But at least the ogres had been distracted from following the retreating ores and appeared to be
listening. One of them, bigger and wearing something that looked like an official sash of some sort, actually seemed to have a
brain. Orgrim could not understand the vile things and used the pause to catch his breath and gulp some water.
"Can't wait till we can kill them again," Rend said. Orgrim glanced at his chieftain's eldest son.
"If we succeed, they'll be Fighting alongside us," Orgrim replied. "You won't be allowed to kill them."
Maim spat. "Heh. Right. Kill 'cm on the sly."
Orgrim grimaced. He himself would like nothing better, but.. . "Several are dead already trying to make this plan of your father's
work- He wouldn't like you undermining his efforts."
Rend sneered at him. "Who's going to tell him?"
"I will. If this works, and they listen to us—if any of them turn up dead, yours are the first names I'll mention."
Rend glowered. Right now, he was so young that it looked like childish petulance, but inwardly. Orgrim was touched with
foreboding. He had never liked Blackhand. and liked his children, with the exception of little Grisclda. even less. He did not know
if it was their parentage or their forced growth that was responsible, but there was a darkness in them that Orgrim mistrusted. One
day, if they survived and began using their brains in addition to their powerful muscles. Rend and Maim would grow up to be
even more dangerous and deadly than their father.
"I told you he wouldn't listen. Rend." Maim said petulantly. "Old man's forgotten what it's like to have bloodlust running through
him. Let's go."
With a final sneer. Rend followed his brother. Orgrim sighed. He had bigger problems than two upstart youngsters right now. He
turned his attention back to the negotiations, although he doubted the ogres would have understood the word. The attacks
appeared to have stopped. Blackhand, who had fled the battlefield as he had told alt his clan to do, now directed his wolf back
down to where the ogres were gathered. Orgrim rode to his chieftain's side, arriving just in time to hear
the leader of the guard announce. "We no like gronn. Gronn hurt us."
He beckoned to one of the other ogres who turned to show his back to Orgrim and Blackhand. Orgrim saw that there were scars
crisscrossing the ogre's back. He felt no twinge of pity for the creature; they had done worse to the orcs for decades. Still, it was
useful to know. The captured ogres had also spoken of such things, and now they nodded as if they were terribly wise.
"What you give us if we join you?" demanded the guard.
Blackhand grinned up at the thing. "Well, for one thing, we won't beat you." Orgrim thought of Blackhand's own sons, but said
nothing. "We'll see to it that you're fed and given appropriate weapons." Orgrim was relieved that Blackhand hadn't promised
armor; three ores could be armored out of the materials that would protect a single ogre. And, fortunately, the guard—obviously
one of the more intelligent of the ogres—still wasn't smart enough to think of armor himself.
"You'll have food, and shelter, and the delight of smashing draenei to small wet stains on the grass."
The other ogres had been listening intently, and now one of them literally jumped up and down with delight, "Me smash!" it
roared gleefully, and several others took up the simple but apparently highly entertaining phrase. Blackhand waited for their
enthusiasm to die down before continuing. "So, are We agreed?"
The ogre captain nodded. "No more hurting of ogres," he growled, and turned to regard those he led. His tiny eyes were shiny with
tears, and this time, as he looked upon the ogres whose backs were crawling with scars, Orgrim did feel a little sorry for them. A
very little.
"What is your name?" Orgrim asked the captain suddenly. It shifted its gaze to him,
"Krol," he said.
"Krol, then," said Blackhand quickly before his second could say more. "When do you think We should lead our combined
assault?"
"Now," Krol said, and before cither Orgrim or Blackhand could protest, he bellowed something in his hideous native tongue. The
other ogres jumped up and down, and the earth shook as they landed. Then they all turned and purposefully reentered the cave
mouth. Blackhand cast a glance over at Orgrim, who shrugged. He suspected it was easier to stop the tide than this flood of stupid,
single-minded giants.
"Call them," Blackhand said. Orgrim produced a clefthoof's single horn and blew on it. The ores cried out in delight and began to
again descend in response.
There was no time to remind the Blackrock clan of the plan. Orgrim hoped they would remember it, especially the ovcrzcalous
Maim and Rend. Slaughter of ogres aplenty awaited them, but they had damned well better be killing the rig/it ogres.
Because if they didn't, if they gave the ogres any reason to question this sudden and very peculiar alliance, then the babes and old
males and females who awaited word at the encampment might be all that remained of the Blackrock clan.
Orgrim was not optimistic. The Blackrock clan had ever been fierce in the hunt. Blackhand was little more than a cunning savage,
and Orgrim had not failed to observe that recendy, a sort of manic fury had begun to creep through all the clans. As he whirled his
wolf around to charge into the cave with his fellow clan members, he wondered if perhaps his eyes were playing tricks on him.
Surely the greenish tinge on the skins of the ores next to him was nothing more than a trick of the light.
SEVENTEEN
Home, Whatever race you are, it is a word, a concept, that makes the heart swell with longing. Home can be ancient ancestral
lands, or a new place that one has made one's own. Home can even be found in the eyes of the beloved. But we all need it, yearn
for it, know that without a home of some sort we are incomplete.
For many years, each clan had its own home. Its own sacred lands, its own spirits of earth, air, water, fire, and spirit of the wilds.
The uprooting began and continued, each more shattering than the last, until we came to Kalimdor. Here, I
nd a home for a wandering people. A place of rest and sanctuary, where we could regroup and rebuild.
Home, for me, is now named for my father: the land of Durotar.
Durotan lifted his head and sniffed the wind. The scent that filled his nostrils was one of dust and desiccation.
fou
an acrid sort of odor. Not the smell of something burning, not quite, but similar. Once, Drek’Thar would have been able to catch
the scent even better than he. but those days had passed. He was no longer a shaman, but a warlock. The air would not waft to him
when asked, bearing information as detailed as if it had been written on a piece of parchment. And worse. Drek'Thar. along with
the other warlocks of the Frostwolf clan, did not particularly seem to care.
There had been no rain for some time, and the summer seemed hotter than usual. It was the second summer in a row that rains had
come scantily, if at all, and on a whim Durotan knelt and dug his fingers into the soil. Once, it had been fertile loam, dark brown
and emitting a rich earthy scent. Now, his fingers plunged easily into the dust. Its crust crumbled beneath his fingers, yielding
instantly to dissolve into sand that would not hold grasses or crops, would not hold anything. It sifted through his fingers like
water.
He sensed Draka's approach, but did not turn around. Her arms slipped about his waist from behind and she pressed against him.
They stood like that, for a long moment, then with a final squeeze she released him and stepped around to face him. Durotan
dusted off his hands.
"We have never relied that much on what we could grow anyway," he said quietly.
Draka regarded him with her dark, knowing eyes. His heart ached to look at her. In so many ways, she was better than he. But she
was the mate of the chieftain, not the chieftain, and she did not have to make the choices he did.
The choices he had.
"We have depended upon what We could hunt, mostly," Draka said. "But the animals We hunt survive on what the earth provides.
We're all connected. The shaman knew that."
She fell silent as one of the younger warlocks hurried by, a small capering thing at its heels. As they passed, the little thing turned
to look at Draka and smiled, showing a mouth crammed full of pointed teeth. Draka could not suppress a shudder.
Durotan sighed and handed her a scroll. "I just received this. We must all prepare for a long march. We are to leave our lands."
"What?"
"Blackhand's orders. He has relocated to this new citadel that has been made for him and he wants his army there. It is no longer
enough for us to join together to attack. We must all live together and be ready to follow where Blackhand leads us."
Draka stared up at him incredulously, then her eyes dropped to the scroll. She read it quickly, then rcrollcd it and handed it to him.
"We had best prepare," she said quietly, then turned and strode back to their tent. He watched her go, and wondered exactly what
it was that made his heart break at the sight.
The Citadel was incomplete, but the moment it came into Durotan's sight, he was stopped dead in his tracks. Beside him there
were several awed murmurs.
"So powerful!"
"So big!"
"Worthy of a Warchief!"
Had Durotan spoken, he would have said: Blasphemous, A blight upon the land. Out of harmony with everything we are.
The traveling Frostwolf clan was still many leagues distant, but the Citadel perched upon the horizon like a buzzard. There was
nothing in its design that bespoke orcish building. This structure, this architectural nightmare, this offense to eye and spirit was
larger even than the draenei buildings. Of course, Durotan knew its purpose, and it would have to be enormous if it were to
constantly house an elite force of orcish warriors. Still, he had expected something else.
Instead of the smooth, sleek lines that marked the structures of the draenei, this fortress was sharp and jagged. Instead of
coexisting with the landscape, it dominated it. Hewn from black stone and jagged wood and metal, it fairly brisded against the
sky. Durotan knew that he could see only the main tower from here, but that was enough. He stood as if rooted to the spot,
reluctant to take a single step closer to the monstrosity.
A silent look passed between him and Draka. Were they the only ones left who saw? The rest of the Frostwolves moved forward,
passing their chieftain. Reluctantly. Durotan squeezed his mount and continued.
Proximity to the fortress did nothing to make it seem more attractive. Now Durotan could see other buildings—barracks, storage
silos, a flat expanse of training areas that were crowded with large weapons he had never seen before. They. too. looked dark, and
dangerous, and deadly.
Officious members of the Blackrock clan and others greeted Durotan perfunctorily and sent the Frostwolves to a flat area in the
western part of the complex to begin setting up tents. It was heading on toward dusk when Durotan received the summons to
report to the courtyard of the Citadel, along with several others from his clan. The group of about twenty walked the distance and
waited.
He heard the drums first, in the distance. Durotan tensed. They had specifically been instructed not to bring any weapons, just to
come and wait for . . . they were not told what. Draka glanced at him uneasily. He had no assurance to offer her; he was as in the
dark about what was to unfold as she.
The drums came closer. The earth began to vibrate beneath Durotan's feet. Such was not unusual when the drumming started in
circle, but so far away? He heard other concerned murmurings and knew that he was not the only one with a twinge of
apprehension.
The earth continued to shake, the vibrations growing stronger. Two Blackrock riders approached, looking exultant. "Do not fear,
proud members of the Horde!" one of them cried. "Our new allies, brought into our ranks by the mighty Blackhand. are approaching! Welcome them!"
There was something familiar in the feel of the ground shaking. The only other time Durotan had ever experienced such a thing
was when he had been fighting—
"Ogres!" someone screamed. And indeed, now Durotan could see them. Dozens of them, huge and purposeful, were striding
toward the gathered group of ores. More wolfridcrs from the Blackrock clan were trotting about, shouting and blowing horns in
triumph. The crowd was going insane with delight, yelling and dancing and cheering wildly.
These were the new allies? Durotan could scarcely believe it. Even as he stared, unable to find words, the biggest ogre he had ever
seen appeared. Blackhand himself strode beside it. his movements as lithe and proud as if the mammoth thing did not make him
look like a child's toy.
"We will crush the draenei!" Blackhand bellowed, and as if they had been awaiting the cue, the ogres marching with him cried,
"Crush! Crush! Crush!"
For a sick, dizzying moment, Durotan was a child again, fleeing before such a monster. He blinked, and he again saw in his mind's
eye his father's strong frame smashed and broken, blood and life dripping into the ground, Garad's skull crushed like a nut by a
single blow from an ogre's club.
Ores were fighting alongside monstrous, feeble-brained creatures in an effort to destroy an intelligent, peaceful race.
The world had gone mad,
Velen shuddered. His assistant was at his elbow, offering a warm, soothing drink, but the Prophet waved it away. No comfort
could come from a beverage now. No comfort could ever truly come again.
He had grieved when word had come that Telmor had fallen, and with the city his dear friend Restalaan. It had been even more
painful to hear how the attack had occurred. Velen had seen something special in the youth Durotan had been, and his treatment at
the ore's hands had only served to confirm his faith in the chieftain of the Frostwolf clan. But now this. Durotan and Orgrim had
been the only two ores ever to witness how the green stone had protected the city. One of them had even memorized the
incantation that would deactivate the stone's protective camouflage. A handful had escaped to flee here, to the Temple of Karabor.
Their wounds had been dressed, but there was nothing Velen or anyone else could do to heal their shattered spirits.
But worse news was to come. The refugees did not tell of simple bows and arrows, or axes or spears or hammers being the sole
weapons of destruction. They
spoke in low, hushed voices of greenish-black bolts of terrible pain, of torment beyond anything that the shaman had hitherto
inflicted upon their enemies. They spoke of creatures gibbering and capering at the feet of those who wielded this magic based on
suffering and agony.
They spoke of man'ari.
Suddenly, many things fell into place with a dreadful logic. The abrupt, irrational attacks by the orcs. Their sudden increase in
technology and skills. The fact that they had turned their backs on shamanism, a religion that, as Velen understood it, required a
give-and-take relationship between the elemental powers and those who would wield them. Those who would command man'ari
did not seek balance or harmony with their power; They sought dominance.
Just as Kil’jaeden and Archimonde had.
The ores were nothing more than pawns in the hands of the eredar. Velen knew that he and the rest of the draenei, the "exiles,"
were the real targets. The orcish Horde, augmented now with creatures that were immensely powerful, was the way by which
Kil’jaeden sought to destroy him. For a brief moment Velen wondered if perhaps the new leader of this Horde would listen to
reason; if he would turn and fight alongside the draenei to overthrow Kil’jaeden once he learned how he had been used. He
dismissed the thought almost at once. It was probable that those who were being used by Kil’jaeden knew of the eredar's true
nature and purpose, and the offer of power likely seemed believable as well as seductive. So had Archimonde and Kil’jaeden
succumbed, and they were far older, stronger, and wiser than any ore.
And now, this vision, adding insult to injury. A vision of the lumbering ogres allying with the ores—something that he once
would have dismissed as a dream brought on by a too-rich meal. Now, he knew it to be the truth. Something had changed the
inherent nature of the ores so drastically, so irrevocably, that they had allied with creatures that they had hated for generations
against the draenei, a people they had been tentative friends with for almost as long.
If this had happened elsewhere, the response would be simple. Velen would gather his people and flee, protected by the Naaru.
But the ship had crashed, and K’ure lay dying, and there was no escape other than fighting against this Horde and praying that
somehow, some way, they would survive.
Ah, K'ure, my old friend. How I miss your wisdom now, and how bitter it is that you be in the hands of the enemy, who does not
even understand that you exist.
He held the stone known as Spirit's Song close to his heart, and felt the faintest of flickers from the dying Naaru. Velen closed his
eyes and bowed his head.
Gul'dan looked around the room with utter satisfaction. Everything was going as planned. The Shadow Council had been meeting
for some time now, and thus far, Gul'dan felt confident he had selected them well. They were
J
all prepared—nay, eager—to turn their backs on their people in order to advance their own aspirations to power. They had
accomplished so much already, acting through their puppet that was foolish enough to believe he was a true part of the Council
rather than simply their mouthpiece. It had been easy to get him elected Warchief, and as long as the Council smiled and nodded
at him for the few moments that he attended the meetings, he did not question his position. But Blackhand always departed before
the real meetings began, sent off on some mission or other that made his barrel chest swell with pride.
"Greetings," Gul'dan said as he slipped into his chair at the head of the table. As always, Ner’zhul lurked in a corner, never invited
to sit with the others, but permitted to hear their conversations, Kil’jaeden had so instructed, and while Gul'dan was unsure as to
why his benefactor desired this, he wanted nothing more than to stay in Kil’jaeden's good graces and did not demur.
The Council murmured perfunctory greetings, and Gul'dan got down to business. "How are the various clans reacting to the idea
of ogres as allies? Kargath, let's start with you."
The chieftain of the Shattered Hand clan grinned and grunted. "They are primed for bloodshed, and they don't care who helps
them slit open draenei throats,"
Rough laughter filled the cavern as many of the Council nodded in agreement. In the dim light provided by the torches, their eyes
seemed to Gul'dan to glow orange. A few, however, scowled and did not join in the merriment.
"I have heard protests from some in the Whiteclaw clan." one said. 'And Durotan of the Frostwolves still bears watching, for all
that he led the attack on Telmor."
Gul'dan held up a hand. "Do not fear, I have had Durotan in my mind for some time."
"Why has he not been eliminated?" Kargath growled angrily. "It would be easy to replace him with another more in line with our
plans. Durotan is becoming well known for disagreeing with Blackhand's position—and yours as well."
"That is precisely why I still need him alive," Gul'dan said, watching to see who understood without further explanation. He saw
comprehension register on a few faces, while others still looked puzzled and angry.
"Because he is known for a more moderate stance," Gul'dan continued, regretful that he had to spell it out for anyone on the
Council, "when he docs Finally go along, everyone else who might have doubts goes with him. He speaks for many who do not
dare speak for themselves. If Durotan agrees, so goes their logic, then it must be all right. As Kargath mentioned, the Frostwolf
clan is not the only one who appears to have reservations,"
"But.. . what if there comes a time that he docs not agree? Some line he is not willing to cross?"
Gul'dan smiled frostily. "Then we will deal with him in a way that best advances our power without placing it at risk. As we
always do." Gul'dan decided it was time to change the subject. He leaned forward, placing his hands on the table. "Speaking of
those who have reservations. I have heard that there are some who continue to attempt to contact the elements and the ancestors."
One of the members looked uncomfortable. "I have attempted to dissuade them, but I cannot see how I can punish them for it. It
was, after all, belief that the ancestors wanted us to attack the draenei that even made this possible."
He sounded a bit defiant. Gul'dan smiled reassuringly "Yes indeed. That was the bait that hooked them so deeply." He glanced
over at Ner’zhul. The older shaman met his eyes and then glanced down quickly. Such had been the bait that had hooked Ner’zhul
as well—bait that did not hold the same appeal for Gul'dan.
"But that is no longer necessary," Gul'dan continued. "We must make sure that there is no turning back to the old ways. We have
been lucky indeed in our campaign, and with the ogres success is likely to continue. But if there are any setbacks, any battles that
go poorly, then those who still hold shamanism close to their hearts may find an appreciative car. That won't do at all." He tapped
his chin thoughtfully. "We must do more than simply encourage warlock practices. We must actively discourage shamanism. It
would be unfortunate if for some reason the ancestors actually were able to communicate with their descendants."
Again, he glanced at Ner’zhul. It had only been when Ner’zhul had traveled to the sacred mountain that he had been able to speak
with the ancestors and discover what had really been going on. Until that point, even as powerful a shaman as he was, Ner’zhul
had been tricked by illusions. The answer, therefore, seemed simple.
Deep in the disembodied dreaming floated the beings that were made of light. They had the memories of wlutt had gone before,
and they had glimpses into the future. Long had they dwelt here, fed by the Other, who was like them, but not like them, and who
they sensed was well into the heart of a slow passing. Until recently, they had dwelt in this state of being-not-being in peace and
tranquility. But now, defilement and hatred and danger had come. They could not reach the sleeping, beloved living any longer.
And the beloved living did not come as they used to, to replenish the sacred pool and unintentionally keep the Other alive. Only
the Greatly Deceived One had come, weeping and begging, but too far lost in the deception to be aided.
Suddenly, their deep dreaming was disrupted. A tremor went through them. Pain savaged them and they cried out for aid from the
Other, who could not help them, who could not help itself The dark unholy things that had once been beings of beauty were
coming The ancestors seixsed their approach. They came inexorably, joining their powers, creating a ring
of darkness and severance around the base of the mountain. Darkness visible danced from the twisted things who had followed
Sargeras, lured by the promise of power, fed now with the promise of the obliteration of everything. The ancestors felt the
seething, focused hatred coalesce into a manifestation of greenish-black energy, whipping around like severed tentacles, seeking a
dreadful union. Slowly, inexorably, their stranglehold increased until a rope of shadow power choked the mountain, sealed it shut,
preventing any lost orc from entering, any frantic soul from departing.
And now, the Other, too, cried out in grief as the circle was sealed shut. For without the shaman to bring it water, it could not
even continue to attempt to heal itself. And without the Other, there would eventually be no ancestors.
Far away, in their sleep, the few ores who still secretly thought of themselves as shaman trembled and wept, their dreams
corrupted into nightmares of endless torment and an inescapable doom.
EIGHTEEN
Iam one of the second wave of shaman, just as I am the leader of the second, and I pray better and wiser, incarnation of the
Horde. I have spoken with the elements and spirits, and I have felt them working in harmony with me many times, and refusing
their aid almost as often.
But I have never seen the spirits of the ancestors, not even in my dreams; my soul yearns for such a connection. Until very
recently, those who once walked the path of the shaman did not even dream of being able to walk it again, and yet they do.
Perhaps one day, the barriers between us and the beloved dead, too, will be lifted.
Perhaps.
But I wonder, if they truly knew how far we wandered from their loving teachings, if they saw what we had done in Draenor, done
to Draenor.. . perlxaps even now they would turn their backs on us and leave us to our fates. And if they so chose, I cannot say
that I would blame them.
"I don't understand." Ghun said. He was the youngest of the clan's warlocks, and still, Durotan mused with bitterness, an idealist.
He had seen Ghun's nose wrinkle at the strange creatures he was forced to utilize in the battle against the draenei. He had seen the
youth's face filled with regret as his enemy writhed in agony before him. Drek’Thar had brought the boy to Durotan's attention
after the declaration from Gul'dan had been issued. "What is wrong in hoping that the elements will one day work with us again?
And why can I not go to Oshu'gun?"
Durotan had no real answers for him; the decree that no one must ever again practice the shamanic arts on pain of severe
punishment—or exile or death for repeated violations—had seemingly come out of nowhere. True, most of those who had walked
the shamanic path had turned from it when die elements abandoned them. But what about the ancestors? Why in the world, in this
time of crisis and need, did Gul'dan forbid the ores their most sacred place?
And because he had no answers for a youth who deserved them, Durotan grew angry. His voice was gruff and deep.
"In order to triumph over the draenei, our Warchief has made certain allies. These allies have given us the warlock powers you
control. Do not lie to me, I know you are pleased with the results."
Ghun's sharp-nailed, long fingers had been working in the dead earth and had dislodged a stone. He tossed it up and down in his
palm. Durotan frowned, looking at the boy's skin. The dryness of this place and the harsh conditions under which they had been
laboring for nearly two years now were taking a toll. Normally smooth brown skin, stretched tight over toned muscle, was dry and
flaky. Absently Ghun scratched at a patch of rough skin. Durotan glanced at the new skin underneath.
It had a greenish tint.
For a moment, mindless, animal panic washed over Durotan. Durotan forced himself to be calm and look again. There was no
mistaking it—the skin was indeed slightly green. He had no idea what it meant, but it was new, and it was strange, and he
instinctively did not like it. Ghun seemed not to have noticed. He hurled the rock with a grunt, watching it sail into the distance.
Had Ghun been older, he would have noticed the warning in the tone of voice his clan chieftain used earlier. But he was young
and wrapped up in his own concerns, and did not heed the warning.
"The spells . . . the creatures who obey me ... I am pleased with the efficiency. But not with how it is efficient. It feels—it feels
wrong, my chieftain. Killing is killing, and the elements used to give me powers that killed my foe just as dead. But I never felt
this way about it when they gave me the power. We are in this war because the ancestors told us we needed to kill the draenei,"
Ghun continued. "So why is Gul'dan now saying we can't go talk to them?"
Something inside Durotan snapped. He let out a furious bellow and hauled the boy to his fret. He gripped the fabric of Ghun's shirt
and brought his face to within an inch of the shocked young warlock's.
"It doesn't matter!" he cried. "I will do what is best for the Frostwolves, and now that means doing what Gul'dan and Blackhand
tell us to do. Obey this new order!"
Ghun stared up at him. As abruptly as it came the white-hot fury departed, leaving sorrow in its wake. Durotan added in a harsh
whisper meant for the boy's cars alone, "I won't be able to protect you if you don't."
Ghun looked up at him, an odd, orange gleam in his eyes for an instant, then he looked down and sighed.
"I understand, my chieftain. I will not bring dishonor upon the Frostwolf clan."
Durotan let him go. Ghun stepped back, straightened his clothes, bowed, and departed. Durotan watched him go, conflicted. Ghun,
too, sensed the wrongncss in the way things were unfolding. But a single youth attempting to contact the elements could not stand
against it.
Nor, Durotan thought bitterly, could a single chieftain.
A sacred site was the next to fall beneath the might of the Horde.
Hard on the heels of the proclamation banning shamanism was the order to march on a place the draenei called the Temple of
Karabor. Although it lay close to the Shadowmoon Valley, the ancestral lands of Ner’zhul's own clan, who had taken the name
Shadowmoon from that same valley, no orc had ever seen it before. It was a sacred place, and as such had been respected by the
ores. At least it had been respected until now. when Blackhand stood before his assembled army and ranted against the so-called
"spirituality" of the draenei,
"The cities we have taken so far were mere practice," Blackhand declared. "One day soon, their capital will be destroyed. But
before we shatter their most important city, we will shatter them as a people. We will storm this site! Smash their statues. Destroy
everything that means anything to them. Slaughter their spiritual leaders. They will lose heart and then ... then claiming their city
will be as easy as killing a blind wolf pup."
Durotan. who stood with the other armed and mounted warriors, glanced at Orgrim. As was almost always the case, his old friend
stood at Blackhand's side, Orgrim had become a master at keeping his face impassive, but he could not completely hide his
feelings from Durotan. He, too, knew what this meant. The temple was Velen's home. The Prophet had only been visiting Telmor
that day when Orgrim and Durotan had met him; his place was in the temple, where he prayed and meditated and served as a
prophet and guide to his people. They would very well slay him this day, if he was there. It had been hard enough to kill
Restalaan. Durotan would have prayed that he would not be forced to kill Velen, too . . . had there been anyone to pray to.
Six hours later, as he stood atop the stairs to the great scat of the temple of the draenei, he almost choked from the smells that
assaulted his nostrils. The now-familiar reck of draenei blood. The stench of urine and feces and the thick odor of fear. The sweet,
cloying smell of incense. Blood covered the soles of his boots as they crunched on strewn rushes, releasing a clean fragrance that
somehow made all the other scents so much worse—
Durotan doubled over and vomited, the taste sour in his mouth. He heaved and choked until his stomach was utterly empty, then
with trembling hands rinsed his mouth with water and spat.
Harsh laughter greeted his cars and he flushed. He turned to see Blackhand's two male brats, Rend and Maim, laughing at him.
"That's the spirit," Rend said, chuckling still. "That's all they deserve—our vomit and spit."
"Yeah," said Maim unoriginally. "Our vomit and spit!"
Maim kicked the corpse of a nearby priest clad in pale purple vestments and spat on it. Durotan turned away in disgust and horror,
but there was no respite. Everywhere he looked he saw ores doing the same thing to corpses: defiling them, looting them, putting
on their bloody, rent robes and parading about mockingly. Others were methodically filling sacks with beautifully carved bowls
and plates and candlesticks while they crunched on sweet fruits that had been left as offerings to deities that the ores didn't begin
to understand and didn't want to. Blackhand. with another victory to his credit, had found some kind of alcoholic beverage and
was chugging it down so quickly some of the green fluid spilled and dripped onto his armor.
Is this what we have become? Murderers of unarmed priests, looters of things holy to them, defilers of their very bodies? Mother
Kashur ... in a way I am glad you are forbidden to us ... I would not want you to see this.
"They have taken the temple," said Kil’jaeden, "but they have not found me my prize."
Kil’jaeden's voice was as honey-smooth as ever, but his tail lashed agitatedly. Gul'dan's stomach clenched in fear.
"Velen the Traitor must have known somehow," Gul'dan said. "He is called 'prophet' after all."
Kil’jaeden's massive head whipped around, and Gul'dan had to force himself not to quail. Then Kil’jaeden nodded slowly.
"You are right," he said. "If he were an easy and stupid enemy, I would have found him here now."
Gul'dan began to breathe again. Part of him burned to ask what Velen had done to one who was, he was certain, his own kind in
order to earn himself such single-minded hatred. But Gul'dan was wise enough to
keep silent. He could live with his curiosity unsatisfied on this particular issue.
"With their temple taken for our own purposes. Great One, surely those that remain will all have fled to the city. They will be
there, thinking themselves safe, but they will be trapped instead."
Kil’jaeden stccplcd his scarlet fingers and smiled. "Yes," he said. "Yes. The temple shall be yours. Blackhand is quite comfortably
ensconced in the Citadel. But before you order your little puppets to attack the draenei stronghold, I have a little . . . gift for them."
Ner’zhul waited until Gul'dan was finished. He watched beneath half-closed lids as Gul'dan wrote letter after letter, getting ink
stains on his stubby fingers, using those same stubby fingers to pop a piece of fruit or chunk of meat into his mouth. These were
important letters, then; normally Gul'dan would have one of the unctuous scribes send out missives.
The temple had been . . . purged, was the word Gul'dan had used. The priests that lingered to bravely and foolishly stand against
the wave of ores had been killed with ruthless speed and efficiency. Ner’zhul heard that their bodies had been violated, and found
that part of him still held onto enough compassion that the thought sickened him. Those violated bodies were long gone, as were
their sacred items. Much of the temple had been closed off; the Council and its servants did not require that much room. Some
furnishings had been taken and used for the Council's needs. Others had been torn down or removed, replaced with the dark,
ominously spiky decorations that were rapidly becoming inextricably associated with the Horde. The entire structure had been
renamed the Black Temple, and instead of priests and prophets, it now played host to liars and traitors. And, Ner’zhul mused
bitterly, he was certainly among that number.
At last, Gul'dan was finished. He dusted the ink with powder to prevent smears and sat back. He looked up at his former master
with thinly veiled disgust.
"Address them and take them to the couriers. see that you do it quickly."
Ner’zhul inclined his head. He still could not bring himself to bow before his erstwhile apprentice and Gul'dan, knowing full well
just how broken Ner’zhul was, did not press it. He sat down in the chair Gul'dan vacated, and the moment Gul'dan's heavy stride
could no longer be heard, he immediately began to read.
Gul'dan expected him to read the letters, of course. And indeed there was nothing contained in them that Ner’zhul did not know.
He was privy to all meetings of the Shadow Council, though he was forced to sit on the cold stone floor of the Black Temple and
not at the huge stone table with those who had the real power. He was not certain just why he was allowed, only that for some
reason Kil’jaeden wanted him there. Otherwise, he was certain Gul'dan would have dispatched him here now.
His eyes flew over the words, and he was sickened by them. He felt utterly impotent, like a fly trapped in the sticky sap that
flowed down the barks of the olemba trees. Or, that used to. From what he had heard, the trees that provided the sweet nectar had
either been cut down, their wood used for weapons, or were dying. Ner’zhul shook off the imagery and began to roll up the
missives, his eyes falling on the unused pieces of parchment and still-filled inkwell and pen.
The thought was so audacious his heart stopped for an instant.
Quickly he looked around. He was completely alone, and there was no reason to expect Gul'dan back. Gul'dan, Kil’jaeden, the
Council—they thought him broken, as harmless as an ancient, toothless wolf that warmed its old bones by the fire until at last it
slipped into the sleep of death. And they were mostly right.
Mostly.
Ner’zhul had reconciled himself to the fact that he had had his power taken away from him. His power, but not his will. If that too
had been taken from him, he would have been unable to resist Kil’jaeden at all. Ner’zhul could not act directly, but he might be
able to contact someone who could.
His fingers trembled as he took another piece of parchment. He was forced to pause for a long moment and calm himself before he
could write anything legible. Finally, he scribbled a brief message, blotted the ink, and rolled it up. The wolf was toothless. But
the wolf had not forgotten what it was like to fight.
More orders to march. Durotan was growing heartily sick of it. Their was no respite any more, just battle, repairing armor, eating
increasingly tough and stringy meat, sleeping on the earth, and another battle. Gone were the times of drumming and feasting and
laughing and ritual. The perfect triangle of the Mountain of Spirits on the horizon had been replaced by the dark, forbidding image
of a spire that occasionally emitted black smoke. Some said a creature slept deep inside the mountain, and that one day, it would
awaken. Durotan did not know what to believe anymore.
When the courier rode up, Durotan took the missive and began to read it with dull eyes. Those eyes widened as he read, and by the
time he had finished it he was sweating and trembling. He looked up, wondering madly if someone had been able to glean the
contents of the letter just by watching him read it. Ores strode past him, dust clinging to their rough, flaky skins and battered
armor. No one gave him so much as a disinterested glance.
He hurried to Draka, the one person in the world he dared share this information with. Her eyes widened as she read.
"Who else knows of this?" she said quietly, fighting to keep her face impassive.
"Only you," he said, equally softly.
"Will you tell OrgrimT"
Durotan shook his head. Pain laced his heart. "I dare not. He is oath-bound to tell Blackhand."
"Do you think Blackhand knows about this?"
Durotan shrugged. "I have no idea who knows what. I only know that I must protect my people. And I will do so."
Draka looked at him long and hard. "If we as an entire clan do not do this thing . . . we will attract attention. You risk punishment.
Maybe even exile or death."
Durotan stabbed a finger at the letter. 'Any one of those things is better than what will happen if we obey No. I have sworn to
protect my clan. I will not give them over to—“
He realized belatedly that his voice had risen and some heads were starting to turn. "I will not give them over to this."
Draka's eyes filled with quick tears and she gripped his arm hard. Her nails dug into his flesh. "That," she said
fiercely, "is why I became your mate. I am so proud of you."
NINETEEN
Iam proud of my heritage. I am proud that I can name Durotan and Draka as my parents. I amproud that Orgrim Doomhammer
called me friend and trusted me with the leadership of the people he loved.
I am proud of iny parents' courage . . . and at the same time, I wish there had been more they could do. But I am not in their place.
It is easy to sit back, secure in my position and comforts in this life, decades after the fact, and say, "You should done this," or
"You should have said that."
I offer no judgment on anyone save a handful of individuals who knew full well what they were doing, knew that they were trading
the lives and destiny of their people for gratification in the moment, and did so gleefully.
For the others .. . I can only shake my head and be grateful that I was not forced to make the choices they did.
Gul'dan was so excited he could hardly contain himself. He had looked forward to this moment ever since Kil’jaeden
had first spoken of it. He had wanted to move forward even faster than his master did, but Kil’jaeden had chuckled and counseled
patience.
"I have seen them, and they are not quite ready yet. Timing is everything, Gul'dan. The same blow delivered too early or too late
docs not kill, only wounds."
Gul'dan thought it an odd metaphor, but understood what Kil’jaeden meant by it. But now, at last, Kil’jaeden thought the ores
ready for the final step.
The Black Temple had a central courtyard open to the night sky When the temple belonged to the draenei, this area had been a
lush garden, with a rectangular pool at the center. The conquerors had drunk their fill of the sweet, pure water over the last few
weeks with no care about replenishing it, and now the pool was nothing more than an empty space of stone and tiles. The trees and
flowering plants that had surrounded it had long since died, withering with astonishing speed. At Kil’jaeden's request, Ner’zhul
and Gul'dan now stood beside that empty pool. Neither of them knew what to expect.
For long hours they stood in utter silence. Gul'dan wondered if perhaps he had displeased his lord in some way. The thought made
him break out in a cold sweat, and he glanced nervously at Ner’zhul. He wondered if perhaps tonight the defiant shaman was
going to be slain for his disobedience, and he perked up a bit at the thought. His mind was wandering, considering various torments that might be imposed upon Ner'zhul, when a sudden loud crack of thunder made them both gasp aloud. Gul'dan looked up
at the sky. Where there had hitherto been a host of stars, now there was only a black emptiness. He swallowed hard, his eyes
riveted on the darkness.
Suddenly the darkness began to churn. It looked like a thundcrhcad. black and pulsing. Then it began to swirl in a spiral. The
spiraling picked up speed. A wind lifted Gul'dan's hair and stirred his robes, gently at first, then more fiercely, until he felt the
wind scouring his skin. The earth beneath his feet rumbled. Out of the corner of his eye he saw Ner’zhul's lips move, but he could
not hear what if anything was said. The wind was too loud, the trembling of the earth beneath his increasingly unsteady feet too
intense.
The sky cracked open.
Something bright and blazing screamed to earth directly in front of Gul'dan and Ner'zhul. It struck the ground so hard that Gul'dan
was knocked off his feet. For a long, terrifying minute, he could not breathe; he simply lay on the earth and gasped like a fish until
finally his lungs remembered how to function and he inhaled a great surge of air.
He got to his feet, his body shaking uncontrollably, and lost his breath again at what he beheld.
It towered over him. Chunks of earth flew as it shook four legs that ended in hooves and flapped
large, leathery wings in annoyance. Its hair was more of a mane, flowing in green tendrils over its neck and down its back. Green
eyes glittered like fiery stars and its swooping tusks caught the dim light as it opened its mouth. It seemed to have row after row of
sharp teeth, and its bellow made Gul'dan want to drop to the earth and weep in utter terror. Somehow, he remained standing and
silent before the monstrosity. It raised its clenched fists and shook them fiercely, then lowered its head and looked around at the
huddled, quaking ores.
What is that thing? Gul'dan screamed silently.
Suddenly. Kil’jaeden appeared, looking down at Gul'dan and grinning fiercely.
"Behold my lieutenant, Mannoroth. Well has he served me and well shall he continue to serve. On other worlds, they call him the
Destructor. But here, he is the savior. Gul'dan," purred Kil’jaeden, and suddenly Gul'dan felt weak and sick again. "You know
what I am offering your people."
Gul'dan swallowed hard. He did not dare glance at Ner'zhul, whose gaze he felt boring into his back.
Yes, he knew well what Kil’jaeden was offering. Power beyond imagining . . . and slavery for eternity. Kil’jaeden had offered the
former to Ner'zhul in exchange for the latter, and Ner'zhul, the coward, had balked. He had not wanted to doom his people.
Gul'dan was untroubled by such scruples. All he could think of was the reward Kil’jaeden had promised. "I do know. Great One,"
Gul'dan said, surprised by the strength and steadiness of his voice, "I know, and I accept my lord's most generous offer."
Kil’jaeden smiled. "Excellent," he said. "You are wiser than your predecessor."
Confident and elated, Gul'dan turned to gloat at Ner’zhul. The elder shaman stared at his former apprentice imploringly He did not
dare to speak, of course, but he did not need to. Even in the dim light of the stars, his expression was plain to read.
Gul'dan's lips curled around his tusks, and he turned back to regard Mannoroth. He was still terribly imposing, but Gul'dan's fear
had retreated in the face of his overwhelming desire for power. He gazed at the being, knowing that it, like he himself, was highly
regarded by the one they both served. They were brothers in arms.
"Only a special blade can do what I ask of you, Gul'dan," rumbled Kil’jaeden. He extended his hand. The dagger seemed tiny in
comparison to the huge palm upon which it rested, but it was quite large when Gul'dan curled his own fingers around it.
"This has been forged in the fires of the mountain in the distance," Kil’jaeden said, pointing to the smoking mountain. "My
servants have worked long and hard to craft it. You know what to do, Mannoroth."
The creature nodded its huge head. Its tail moving to balance its bulk, it knelt on its front two feet and extended an arm. It turned
its hand upward, exposing the comparatively softer flesh of its wrist.
For a heartbeat, Gul'dan hesitated. What if this was some sort of trick, or a test? What if Kil’jaeden really didn't want him to do
this? What if he failed?
What if Ner’zhul was right?
"Gul'dan," said Kil’jaeden, "Mannoroth is known for many things. Patience is not among them."
Mannoroth growled softly and his green eyes glinted. "I am eager to see what will happen. All of your people ... Do it!"
Gul'dan swallowed hard, lifted the blade, aimed its gleaming edge toward the flesh of Mannoroth's exposed wrist, and brought the
knife down as hard as he could.
And flew backward from the force of Mannoroth's blow as the creature bellowed in pain. Dazed, he lifted his head and blinked,
trying to clear his vision.
Liquid fire spouted from the wound, glowing a sickly greenish yellow as it pumped into the pool of the draenei priests. The injury
was tiny compared to the vastness of Mannoroth's body, but the blood flowed steadily as if from a waterfall. Faintly, Gul'dan was
aware that Ner’zhul, the weakling, was crying. Gul'dan could not tear his eyes from the sight of the unholy blood pouring, pouring
without ceasing, from the creature who continued to roar and thrash in pain. He got to his feet and walked over to the edge of the
pool, being very, very careful not to come into contact with the fluid spewing from the wound he himself had made. "Behold the
blood of the Destructor," gloated Kil’jaeden. "It burns away all diat will not serve you, Gul'dan. It cleanses all thoughts of
hesitation, confusion, or uncertainty. It creates a hunger that can be directed any way you choose. Your little puppet thinks he
rules die Horde, but he is wrong. The Shadow Council thinks they rule the Horde, but they are wrong."
Gul'dan lifted his eyes from the pool of glowing green liquid that continued to pump from Mannoroth's injured arm to gaze raptly
at Kil’jaeden.
"Gul'dan ... it will soon be you who rules the Horde. They are ready They thirst for what you will give diem."
Gul'dan again turned to look at the flowing liquid.
"Call them to you. Quench that thirst. .. and what their hunger."
The now-familiar horn awakening the Horde and summoning them to the courtyard blew before dawn. Durotan had not been
sleeping; he did not sleep much anymore. He and Draka rose without a word and began to dress.
Suddenly he heard her inhale swiftly. He turned at once to see that she was staring at him, her eyes wide.
"What is it?" he asked.
"Your . . . your skin," she said quietly He looked down at his bare chest. His skin was dry and flaky and as he scratched at it, the
skin beneath it looked . . . green. He remembered seeing the same tint on young Ghun's skin not so long ago.
"It's just the light," he said, trying to reassure them both. She would not be so easily placated. Draka lifted her own arm and
scratched. Her skin, too, was green. She lifted dark eyes to him. They both saw it. It was no trick of the light.
"What is happening to us?" Draka asked.
Durotan had no answer. They continued to dress in silence, and as he went outside to the courtyard to wait, Durotan's eyes kept
traveling to his arm, the strange green hue of his skin hidden beneath dented metal armor.
The announcement about the assembly had come yesterday afternoon, during a training session with some of the younger ores.
Durotan still could not get used to seeing children who, a few months earlier, had been barely able to walk now wielding swords
and axes with extraordinary power. They seemed content with their new status, even pleased, but Durotan fought the urge to shake
his head every time he saw them.
Durotan found he could not even summon curiosity about their next target. It would be the same as before—slaughter, rage,
defilement of corpses. Recently, even the bodies of slain Horde had been left where they had fallen, their weapons and armor
taken to be used on a living body. Sometimes a friend or family member bowed over die corpse for a moment, but even that was
happening less frequently. Gone were the days of bringing home the honored dead and placing them with deep ritual upon a
funeral pyre, their spirits sent with all ceremony to join the ancestors. Now, there was no time for rituals, or pyres, or the
ancestors. There was no time for the dead. There was no time for anything, it would seem, but slaughtering draenei and mending
weapons and armor so the Horde could go out again to continue the task.
He stood with dull eyes in the courtyard, awaiting his orders. Blackhand rode to the gates of the Citadel, where they could see him
clearly. There was a wind today With nothing to block it in this desolate place, it caused the banners of the various clans to snap
fiercely.
"We have a long march ahead of us," Blackhand cried. "You were told to pack supplies. I hope you listened. Warriors, your
weapons must be ready and your armor sound. Healers, have your ointments, potions, and bandages at hand. But before we march
to war, we will march to glory."
He lifted a hand and pointed off in the distance, where the sullen mountain that jutted against the sky puffed black smoke.
"That is our first destination. We will stand on the mountain . . . and what happens there will be remembered for a thousand years.
It will begin a time in which the ores will know power that we have never before tasted."
He paused to let this sink in, and nodded, visibly pleased, at the murmur that ran through the crowd.
Durotan tensed. So ... it would be today....
Never one to talk more than he needed to. Blackhand ended this rallying speech with, "Let us go!"
The Horde surged forward eagerly, curious and excited by Blackhand's words. Durotan looked quickly at Draka, who merely
nodded her support of his plan. Then, forcing his heavy feet to move, he followed, caught up in the tide.
There was a narrow, steep path that led partway up the smoky mountain to a large plateau. It looked to Durotan as if a chunk of
the mountainside had been cut away with a clean sword strike, so unnaturally perfect was it. His skin crawled at the thought. Very
little that came into his life these days was natural, it seemed. Three large slabs of black, polished stone lay in a row, partially
embedded in the soil. Theywere beautiful, but sinister at the same time. The ores were wear)* after the long climb in the hot sun
wearing full armor and carrying weapons and supplies, and Durotan wondered what the logic behind this was. There seemed little
point in exhausting the warriors before the battle. Perhaps the attack would come later, on the morrow when they were rested.
To Durotan's surprise, once everyone had gathered and quieted, it was not Blackhand who addressed them, but Gul'dan.
"It was not so very long ago," Gul'dan said, "that we were a scattered people. We came together only twice a year, and then only
to sing and dance and drum and hunt." He said the words in a voice dripping with contempt. Durotan looked down. For centuries,
the clans had come together at the Kosh'harg festival. It was not something foolish, as Gul'dan's tone of voice implied, but
something sacred and powerful. It was what had kept the clans from attacking one another. But it might have been a lifetime ago,
by the way the ores around him reacted. They, too, grunted in disapproval, shook their weapons fiercely, and looked ashamed.
Even those among them who had been the shaman.
"Now, look at us! We stand shoulder to shoulder, clan by clan. Laughing Skull next to Dragonmaw, Thundcrlord next to Warsong,
all under the strong, insightful leadership provided by Blackhand—whom you have chosen to unify you. For Blackhand!"
A cheer went up. Durotan and Draka did not participate.
"Under his shrewd guidance, and with the blessings of the beings who have chosen to ally with us, we have grown strong. We
have grown proud. We have advanced further in skills and technology in the last two years than we have in two centuries. The
threat that once loomed over us has been broken, and it will take only a final push to see it forever crushed. But first.. . first, we
will pledge ourselves to this cause and receive blessings in return."
He bent and held up a strange chalice. It looked to be carved from the horn of some creature, but Durotan had never seen even a
clefthoof sport so
large a horn. Too, it was curved and yellowed. Strange glyphs had been inscribed on it, and as the night closed in around them, the
inscriptions seemed to glow faintly. Whatever the cup contained glowed as well. As Gul'dan held it before him, an eerie yellowgreen light lit his face from beneath, casting grotesque shadows.
"This is the Cup of Unity," Gul'dan said in a reverent voice. "This is the Chalice of Rebirth. I offer this to the leader of every clan,
and he in turn may offer it to anyone in his clan whom he wishes particularly blessed by the beings who have been so very, very
good to us. Who will come forth first, to pledge his loyalty and receive his blessings?"
Gul'dan turned a little to his right, toward Blackhand. The other orc grinned and opened his mouth to speak when a savage,
familiar voice rent the night air.
No, Durotan thought. No ... not him....
Draka's hand clamped down hard on Durotan's arm. "Will you warn him?"
Durotan's throat worked. He could not speak. He shook his head: No. Once, he had counted the slender but imposing orc who
strode boldly forward as a friend. But he could not risk revealing that he knew what was going on.
Not even for Grom Hcllscream.
The chieftain of the Warsong clan had made his way through the crowd to stand in front of Gul'dan. Blackhand looked a bit put
out at Hcllscream. Clearly, both Gul'dan and Blackhand had anticipated that the Warchief would drink first.
Gul'dan's mouth quirked in a smile. "Ever one to seize the moment, dear Grom." he said, bowing a little as he handed the cup
filled with the swirling green fluid to Grom. Waves of heat and light rose up from the chalice, and Grom's face—already
decorated to inspire fear in his enemies and respect from his allies—looked even more alarming.
Grom did not hesitate. He brought the cup to his lips and drank deeply. Durotan watched, straining to see the reaction. Perhaps,
after all. the letter had not been sent by someone who wished him good; perhaps it had been a trap—
Gul'dan barely had time to take the chalice from Grom before the other orc stiffened and shuddered. He doubled over for a
moment, and the crowd murmured in worry. Durotan stared, horrified, as Grom's hunched-over body pulsated and quivered.
Before his eyes, Grom's shoulders, slender for an ore's, broadened. His armor creaked as it settled over this newly powerful body.
Slowly, Grom straightened. Tall as ever he had been, reshaped by the green liquid to be stronger and thickly muscled, he looked
out over the crowd.
What Durotan could see of his face was smooth and healthy and, save for the tattooed jaw . . . completely green.
Grom threw his head back and shrieked again. The
cry was louder than Durotan had ever heard it. It was almost like a knife made of sound that ripped through one's body and left
one shattered and bleeding. Durotan covered his cars, as did nearly everyone else, but he could not tear his gaze from Grom's face.
Grom's eyes now glowed red.
"How do you feel, Grom Hcllscrcam, of the Warsong clan?" asked Gul'dan with a peculiar mildness.
Grom's expression of ecstasy was so keen it was almost pain, and he seemed to grope for words. "I feci... magnificent! I feel..." He
broke off and screamed a third time, as if only the primal cry would do. "Give me draenei flesh to tear and rip! Draenei blood on
my face... I will drink it down until I can hold no more! Give me their blood!"
His chest heaved with the passion of his emotions, his fists clenching and unclenching. He looked prepared to attack an entire city
with nothing but his bare hands ... and Durotan thought he would win that battle. Hcllscrcam motioned to his clan.
"Voices of the Warsong! Come forth! Not a one of you will be denied this ecstasy!"
The Warsong warriors rushed forward, all eager to feel what their chieftain was feeling. The cup was passed around, and one by
one. they drank. Each one shuddered for a moment in deep pain; each one passed through that pain to apparent delight and
obviously increased strength. And the eyes of every one who drank turned a blazing red. Blackhand watched, his frown
increasing. When the last of the Warsongs had drunk from the cup, he grunted. "I will drink!" he demanded, seizing the cup and
swigging down a great gulp. Blackhand clutched his throat for a moment, but stayed completely silent while whatever dark magic
was in the cup did its hellish duty. He had removed his armor, and the muscles rippling and growing beneath his taut green skin
were clearly visible. Red eyes glowed when he finally looked up. He motioned to his sons, and Maim and Rend shoved other ores
perfunctorily out of their way as they rushed forward. Durotan saw Griselda, Blackhand's only daughter, hesitate before she, too,
stepped up to drink. Blackhand sneered at her.
"Not you," he snarled. Grisclda drew back as if struck. Durotan, who had always been fond of the girl, breathed a sigh of relief.
Blackhand intended to shame her. Instead, he was unwittingly giving her a great gift. Blackhand motioned to Orgrim.
"Come, friend Orgrim! Drink with me!"
Even now, even as his best and oldest friend was being summoned to drink the dark liquid, Durotan could not speak. But
thankfully, he did not need to. Orgrim bowed his head.
"My chieftain. I will not take that glory from you. I am your second, not chieftain, and I do not seek that position."
Durotan sagged with relief. Orgrim saw what Durotan had seen, even though he was not privy to the
information Durotan had been given. He was not a fool. He owned his own soul, and he would not surrender it for the sort of
power that racked the body and made the eyes burn with such a sinister gleam.
Now the other clan chieftains lined up, anxious for this blessing that had so excited two of their most famous and respected
chieftains. Durotan did not move. Drek’Thar leaned in and whispered, "My chieftain—do you not wish the blessing?"
Durotan shook his head. "No. Nor will I permit any of my clan to drink."
Drek’Thar blinked, shocked. "But. . . Durotan, it is obvious that this drink grants great power and passion! You would be a fool
not to drink it!"
Durotan shook his head, recalling the contents of the letter. He had been skeptical at first; now he was certain. "I would be a fool
if I did," he said quicdy, and when Drek’Thar tried to protest, he silenced the former shaman with a look.
Unbidden and unexpected, words from the draenei prophet Velen floated back to Durotan: We chose not to sell our people into
slavery, and for that we were exiled. Durotan knew in his bones that once the ores had drunk from this chalice, their will was no
longer theirs. Gul’dan was doing exactly what the leaders on die draenei's home world had done. He had sold his people into
slavery. History was repeating itself; now it was Durotan who defied his leaders for the sake of his people. Perhaps he and his
clan, like the draenei, would soon be "exiled ones." It did not matter. What he was doing was right. He realized that now all the
chieftains save he had drunk, and the moment he had dreaded was upon him.
Gul'dan waved him forward. "The mighty Durotan! The hero of Telmor!" Durotan forced his face to remain still. "Come and join
with the other chieftains. Drink your fill from the chalice!"
"Nay, Gul'dan, I will not do so."
In the light of the torches. Durotan could see that a muscle twitched near Gul'dan's right eye,
"You refuse? Do you think you are better than the others? Do you think you do not need the blessing?"
The other chieftains were frowning now. their breathing labored as if they had been running, their brows glistening with sweat.
Durotan did not rise to the bait. "It is my choice."
"Perhaps others in your clan feel differently," Gul'dan said, sweeping his arms to include the Frostwolf clan in his expansivencss.
"Will you let them drink, then?"
"No. I am die chieftain of die Frostwolf clan. And this is what I choose."
Gul'dan stepped down from the obsidian slab and strode to Durotan. He leaned in and whispered in the chieftain's car. "What do
you know and how did you know it?"
It was no doubt meant to be an intimidating gesture, but instead Durotan was filled with new hope. Gul'dan
felt threatened. But instead of sending an assassin in the night to dispatch someone he regarded as an inconvenience, he was trying
to bully Durotan into submission. He had just confirmed the truth of the contents of the mysterious letter, and revealed that he had
no idea who its author was. Durotan realized he could survive this and still protect his clan.
He said, equally quietly, "I know enough. And you will never discover how I learned it."
Gul'dan pulled back and forced a smile. "It is indeed your choice, Durotan, son of Garad. And if you choose to deny yourself such
a blessing, then you must bear the consequences."
The words were double-edged, but Durotan didn't care. Another day, he might need to worry about what Gul'dan had planned for
him.
But not tonight.
Gul'dan returned to his position and cried out to the crowd. "All who wish the blessing of the mighty Kil'jaeden, our benefactor,
have received it. Think of this place as hallowed ground, for here the ores took steps to become something far greater dian what
we were born as. Think of this mighty mountain as Kil’jaeden's throne, where he sits and watches and blesses us as we do work
that will purge us still further of anything other than the best of which we are capable."
He stepped back and nodded to Blackhand. His eyes glowing red, his armor catching the flickering of the torches, Blackhand
lifted his arms and cried, "Tonight We make history. Tonight We attack the last remaining stronghold of our enemy. We will tear
limbs from bodies. We will bathe in blood. We will storm through the streets of their capital like their worst nightmare. Blood and
thunder! Victory to the Horde!"
Durotan stared. Tonight? There had been no strategy discussed. This was not some little hamlet or village Blackhand was talking
about, but the draenei capital. This was their place of last refuge, and he was certain they would fight more fiercely than they had
ever before, like cornered animals. He recalled the huge engines of war that had been built, and knew that Blackhand had ordered
them moved—where, neither Durotan nor the others knew.
Madness. This was madness.
And as he looked at the screaming bodies surrounding him, their eyes all twin pinpricks of crimson light, he realized that the word
was truer than he thought.
Those who had drunk from the tainted cup had indeed gone mad. Grom Hcllscrcam danced closer to the fire, waving his newly
muscular arms and throwing his head back, the firelight dancing on once-brown skin that had now turned green. Durotan, sick and
dazed with horror, looked into glowing red eyes that were so akin to those of the enslaved creatures the warlocks commanded; that
green skin, the same green hue that was already tainting the skins of the warlocks, like Ghun, was even starting to taint Durotan's
own skin and that of the one he loved with all his heart.
He thought of the contents of the letter, written in an archaic tongue that few but the highly educated— the shaman and the clan
leaders—would know:
You will be asked to drink. Refuse. It is the blood of twisted souls, and it will twist yours and those of all who imbibe. It will
enslave you forever. By the love of all we once held dear, refuse.
The ancient language had a single word for "twisted souls.
These were the things that were held in check by the warlock's will, but just barely. The fluid that had passed the lips of those
Durotan had called both friend and foe had been the blood of one such. And Durotan watched as the twisted souls that the ores
now were somehow bound to danced insanely in the torchlight before racing down the mountains to run, fueled with unnatural
rage and energy, to attack the most fortified city this world had ever seen.
Twisted souls.
Dae'mons. Demons.
TWENTY
I have spoken to many who were there at the destruction of the city of Shattrath. When I ask them about the event, their minds are
clouded and their recall is poor. Even Drek'Thar, who remembers so much with astonishing clarity, stammers and hesitates when
asked to recall the details. It is as though with demonic blood fresh in their mouths, those who drank can remember only the fury
they felt and not what they did in its grasp. And even those who did not drink, that small handful of which Drek'Thar is a
member—even they cannot summon the details to mind. It is as if such an atrocity was so horrific that it wants to be forgotten.
That some draenei survived the assault is not in doubt; I have seen the sad, pathetic things that were once the glorious draenei
with my own eyes, wandering forlornly here in Azeroth, soft and shattered, crying for home. These "lost ones" are to be pitied.
So it is that this account is vague, and I regret it. Such a
moment, dark though it may be, should not be forgotten or glossed over. But such is the chronicler's challenge.
The ores charged down the trail, burning with a feral need to destroy. Some were so overflowing with rage and hatred that they
took swipes at the very rocks as they passed them. Sonic bellowed their fury. Others were grimly, deathly silent, all their energies
contained and simmering, ready to be released at the proper moment.
During that long run, Durotan was more afraid of his own people—of individuals that he had once called friend—than of any ogre
wielding a club or any herd of talbuks ... or any enraged, attacking draenei. He was cold with sweat, shaking in his boots, but not
from any fear for himself. His fear was for what would happen next—not to the draenei, for their destiny was surely already
written, but to the ores. He could not bring himself in those moments as they were running to Shattrath to call them the Horde.
At one point, a horrible rumbling knocked them all off their feet. As they clambered upright, they turned and looked back to
where they had come.
It looked as if the mountain had exploded. Liquid fire was belched into the night sky, hurtling upward, then falling and splattering
down the jagged peak- It radiated and glowed like the demon blood that the ores had just drunk, though its hue was orange-yellow
and not an eerie green. More and more molten stone was spewed from the mountain. It was a glorious, mesmerizing, and horrific
sight.
The ores took it as a sign, and a cheer erupted from their ranks. After a few moments of celebrating at the very mountain, the
Throne of Kil’jaeden, blessing their endeavor, they turned and continued their race toward slaughter.
A mile outside the city, they slowed. An area had been cleared, and recently too, and for a moment the first ores to arrive at this
site simply stared in confusion. This was where they had been told to assemble; this was where their war engines were supposed
to have been quartered.
Then, with no warning, something materialized right in front of their eyes. The ores drew back, hissing. Then in the face of all
sanity and logic, they started snarling at the huge being. It towered over them, three times taller than the tallest ogre, red from its
cloven hooves to the tip of its lashing tail, from its jutting horns to its sharp black nails. Its size was like nothing they had ever
seen, but its shape . . . Durotan stared at it, thinking that it looked like nothing so much as a gigantic, crimson-skinned draenei.
The sudden realization that the ores had been plunged into a personal conflict that should never have concerned them crashed over
him like a tidal wave.
"You have nothing to fear and everything to celebrate, you who have sworn your allegiance to me!" it cried, its voice penetrating
to the very bone, "I am Kil'jaeden, the Beautiful One, the one who has been with you since the beginning. And I am with you now
as you head to the most glorious battle yet. Once, the wicked draenei plotted against you, hiding an entire city from your eyes. But
you have destroyed that city, and others, and vanquished their temple. All that remains is this one final battle, and then the threat
will be eliminated.
"The green stone that once hid the city of Telmor from you now hides their doom from them. Kehla men samir, solaylamaa kahl!"
And the illusion was dispelled. Before them were dozens of catapults, battering rams, siege weapons of all varieties. Standing
beside the engines of war were the ogres, still and silent, their stupid faces filled with determination. They bore weapons suited to
their size, and Durotan realized that there were at least three dozen of them ready to fight. They made the huge weapons look like
toys.
"There is more, , , ," Kil’jaeden said, and waved his hands. The warlocks all cried out and grasped their heads for a moment, then
blinked and grinned. "New spells have flooded your minds. Use them well. Take the draenei now!"
As if he had opened a gate, the bloodthirsty ores leaped into motion. Some of them made for the weapons by which a walled city
would fall, pushing them forward with a strength which Durotan had never before seen them display. The ogres immediately went
to the others, moving the enormously heavy weapons at a brisk pace. Other ores were too far sunk in bloodlust, and simply raced
forward in the direction of the city. What they would do when they got there Durotan did not know, but he and his clan followed
dutifully.
The war machines propelled by the ogres and the ores rumbled steadily on. But even before they were maneuvered into position,
the walls that protected the city were under attack. Enormous, green-glowing rocks fell from the sky to slam into the city. Towers
and citadels that had risen above the wall level cracked and shattered, and the wall itself was starting to crumble in several places.
But it was not just boulders falling from the sky that comprised the attack—it was what rose from them once they had landed.
Moving deliberately but with sickening speed, creatures that appeared made of the same glowing green stone got to their feet and
charged. They hammered at the wall, joined now by more mundane stones hurled by the catapults and huge tree trunks rammed
into the great gate door. Two ogres were pounding on the door with their clubs, and the timber shuddered. From within, Durotan
could hear cries of fury and horror as the draenei tried to battle the creatures—"infcrnals," as he heard one warlock refer to them.
Most of the warlocks were using these new servants, but a few still had the smaller, more familiar creatures obeying their
commands.
The city could not last long under such an assault. With a mighty crash, an entire section of stone wall
crumbled. The tide of crazed ores and bellowing ogres swarmed through the breech thus created, shrieking and swinging weapons.
Durotan remained where he was, rooted to the earth, watching as the ores fought and killed and died.
The rage and fury he had seen them display before in the thick of battle was nothing compared to what he saw now. There was no
strategy, no attempt at defense, no calls for retreat when retreat was necessary. This was nothing more than murder and slaughter,
dealing death and receiving it, stupidly rushing into dead ends where traps had been laid. Such was to be expected from the ogres,
and as they fell heavily, blood streaming from their bodies, Durotan did not mourn them. But the ores . . . they were beyond caring
about anything but the sensation of their own blood singing in their veins and the battle cries pouring from their throats.
Dozens . . . no, no, hundreds would die this night. The casualties would render the city unlivablc. Come sunrise, blue and green
bodies would litter the streets. But for now, it was carnage and chaos and the very depths of insanity. Durotan swung his axe
because it was fight or die, and even now, even though he knew his people were on a dark road, he did not wish death.
Kil’jaeden and Mannoroth stood together, watching the green meteors that housed infcrnals crashing to the earth. "They swarm
like insects," grunted Mannoroth. Kil’jaeden nodded, pleased. "Indeed. It is beautiful to watch, I am well pleased."
"What next?"
Kil’jaeden turned eyes of mild surprise on his lieutenant. "Next? There is no next, at least not here. The ores have fulfilled my
purpose. They burn with your blood, my friend. It will consume them eventually unless they have an oudct for it. and that outlet is
only to be found in slaughtering every last draenei on the face of this world."
He watched as fire joined the glowing green hue in the distance.
"It is well that you are done here," Mannoroth said. "Archimonde mutters that you are wasting time, and our master wishes us
elsewhere."
Kil’jaeden sighed. "You speak the truth. Sargeras hungers, and he has been very patient with mc. I do regret one thing—that I
won't be watching as they gut Velen. Ah well. Enough to know that it happened. Let us leave this place."
He gestured, and both he and his lieutenant disappeared.
"What do you mean, he was not there?" Gul'dan shrieked. This could not be.
"What I said," Blackhand growled. "We scoured the city. Velen was nowhere to be found."
"Perhaps an ovcrcagcr grunt found him first and mutilated the body," Gul'dan said nervously. This was
not good news. He had instructed Blackhand to find the corpse of the prophet Velen and bring the draenei's head to Gul'dan. It
was to be a present to Kil’jaeden.
"Possible. Even likely," Blackhand said. "But from what you told mc, even if his body had been hacked to pieces, he could not
have been mistaken for an ordinary draenei."
Gul'dan shook his head, feeling worried and slightly sick. The draenei had blue skin and black hair. Velen, their prophet, had pale
white skin and white hair. As long as a piece of his skin remained whole, he could be identified.
"You scoured the city?"
Blackhand's brows drew together. "I told you we did," he said darkly. His breath started to quicken and his eyes turned even
redder as anger rose in him.
Gul'dan nodded. Besotted though the ores were by bloodlust, they would not have failed to search for the body most coveted by
their leader. The reward would be too great, the anger if it were overlooked and discovered ialcrtoo lurious.
Somehow, Velen had escaped. That meant that there were probably other draenei out there. In a sudden panic that made his heart
race, he wondered just how many he had let slip through his fingers . . . and where in this wide, wide world they had gone.
Once Velen had had an entire temple, filled with acolytes and priests and servants, in which to meditate and pray. Now, he was in
a small room, one of only a handful who even had their own room. He held the violet crystal in his hand and tears poured silent
and unheeded down his face.
He watched the fall of the city. He had wanted to stay, to lend his own not inconsiderable magic to the fray, but that path would
have meant death—not merely his own, but that of his people. They did not need a marshal now. The orcs,their systems
permeated with demonic blood, burned with a lust for killing that would not be sated even if they slew every last draenei in
Dracnor, would never be sated until death stiffened their corpses. Kil’jaeden's and Sargeras's Burning Legion of demonic forces
owned them now. The ores had numbers, ogres, warlocks, and a furythat would take them physically and emotionally to places
where no rational mind would dare travel. There was nothing Velen could do but let the city fall, for there was nothing he could
do that could possibly save it.
Nor could the ores be saved. The only flicker of hope for the eventual redemption of the Horde lay in the single clan who had not
drunk the blood, had not made the pact, whose minds and hearts were still their own. Some eighty orcs,and that was all. Eighty, to
stand against over a dozen other clans, most much larger than the)', whose Warchief was the worst of them all. The ores would be
treated as maddened beasts now, whenever any draenei chanced upon them; things to be put down quickly and mercifully, with
the
understanding that while the ores did not fully know what they did, they must die regardless.
Velen had wanted to abandon the city, to have it standing empty when the ores descended. Wanted to save as many draenei lives
as he could. But Larohir, the quick-speaking, intelligent general who had succeeded Restalaan after the lattcr's murder, had
convinced him it would not work.
"If there is an insufficient number of draenei to slaughter," Larohir had said, his voice soft and compassionate but yet hard as steel,
"then the lust that consumes them will not even be sated temporarily. They will still hunger and catch our scent while it is new,
and track us down. Those who flee will die. They must believe that they have slain most of us. And in order for them to believe
that... it must be true."
Velen had stared in horror. "You would have me send my people to knowingly be slaughtered?"
"All but a handful of us know what we fled on Argus," said Larohir. "We remember it. We remember what Kil’jaeden did, what
happened to our people. We would—we will—happily die to preserve even a handful of our race uncorruptcd."
Velen had looked down then, his heart aching. "If the ores believe they have slain us, except for a trivial handful, then Kil’jaeden
will be satisfied. He will depart."
"The ores will suffer greatly," said Larohir, and did not look displeased. After what the ores had done to the draenei recently,
Velen could not blame him. "They will. And I have no doubt that they will continue to track us down."
"But the methods they use to track a few dozen will be different than if they suspect there are a few hundred of us remaining," said
Larohir. "It is to our advantage to appear as scattered and helpless as possible."
Velen had looked up at Larohir. haunted. "It is easy for you to speak so. But the decision is not yours. It is mine. I must be the one
to say, 'You—you and your family will come with me and live. But you, and you, and you—you will stay behind and let demoncrazed ores tear you to pieces and anoint themselves with your blood.*"
Larohir said nothing. There was nothing to say.
Velen had spoken with each of his people he had chosen to send to die. He had embraced them and blessed them; he had taken
items that meant something to them and promised to see that these things survived. He had watched as, stoic and dry-eyed, these
walking dead had repaired their armor and sharpened their swords, as if the outcome was actually in question. And he had
watched as they marched off, singing the ancient songs, to enclose themselves behind a walled city and wait for mace or axe or
spear to end their lives.
Velen could not go with them. He had unique abilities, and if the draenei were to survive, he needed to as well. But he had used
the crystal to watch every moment of the battle, and the pain he felt was scaring and
yet purifying. Not one of these people would have died in vain.
The ores did not know about the Zangarmarsh. They had not yet sniffed out this hiding place, and if Velen had anything to say
about it, they never would. Here, the best draenei minds would continue to devise ways to harness energies and direct them, to
keep safe the handful who had survived. Here, they would regroup and recover, heal and wait and pray they had at last tricked
Kil’jaeden the Deceiver and escaped his terrible gaze.
The ores had captured three of the stones, but Velen still had four: Fortune's Smile, Eye of the Storm, Shield of the Naaru, and, of
course. Spirit's Song, And although his link with the Naaru was tenuous, K’ure yet lived.
Even as tears spilled down his white face to drop on the surface of the violet crystal, even as he grieved the
utterly tragic loss of so many lives, Velen, prophet of the draenei, felt hope stirring inside him.
TWENTY-ONE
We had lost everything by this point. We had abandoned balanceand harmony in our world, and thus the elements had abandoned
us. Demons guarded the entrance to Oshu'gun, cutting us off from the ancestors. Our physical bodies and our very souls had
become corrupted from the blood that, in their eagerness for power and strength, most of the ores had gladly imbibed. And then,
then—when we had done all this to ourselves under the "guidance"of GuYdan. Kit'jaedenabandoned us. Thuscame what has been
called the Dying Time. May its like never visit us again.
"What do I do?" Gul'dan could not believe the words were coming from his own lips, but he was so terrified that advice, any
advice, seemed better than this sick fear he lived with.
Ner’zhul regarded him with contempt. "You made this choice."
"It's not as if you are blameless yourself!" Gul'dan snapped,
"Of course not. I made choices for myself, for my own advancement. But I never threw away the future of my people—my
world—for it. Where is the power you were promised now. Gul'dan? The power that you bartered our people for?"
Gul'dan turned away, trembling. There was no power, and Ner’zhul knew it. which was why his words bit so deeply.
Far from rewarding his loyal servant with glories and godhood, Kil’jaeden had simply vanished. All that was left of his presence
in this world were the warlocks and their demons, a maddened Horde, and a ravaged land.
No, he thought. No, that was not all that was left.
There was still the Shadow Council. There was still Blackhand. the ideal puppet precisely because he did not realize he was one
such. And while the Horde was now infused with the blood of demons, and craved violence and destruction more than meat and
drink, they had not gotten out of control. At least, not yet.
He would summon the Council to meet in their beautiful Black Temple. Doubtless the)', too, would be searching for ways to
salvage what power was left.
Yes. There was still the Shadow Council.
"The land is dead," Durotan said quietly as he stood with his old friend surveying what had once been vcrdant meadows and
foothills, Durotan scuffed at the dirt with his boot. Powdery sand and rock were revealed as he kicked away the dead yellow grass.
Wind, no longer blocked by trees, whistled past them.
Orgrim said nothing for a long time. His eyes told him Durotan was right. He looked to the riverbed where he and Durotan had
swum in one of their many challenges, and saw no hint that water had ever flowed in it. What water remained in the land was
filthy, clogged with animal corpses and sediment. To drink it was to risk illness; not to drink was to die.
No water, no grasses. Here and there were places that still managed to survive, such as the Terokkar forest, ancestors knew how.
The ores were growing thin, for no grasses meant no herd animals. The last three years had seen more orcish deaths from
starvation and disease than from the battles against the draenei,
"More than the land is dead." Orgrim said at last. His voice was thick and heavy. He turned to face Durotan. "How is the
Frostwolf's grain supply?"
To his eyes, he and Durotan looked green. Next to others, such as Grom and Blackhand, they still were more brown than green,
but the damage was being done, Durotan had theorized that it was the warlock powers that were doing this to them and their
world. Certainly those who had directly drunk whatever potion Gul'dan had concocted for them were a more vivid hue than others.
Strange, Orgrim thought. There was irony in that while the land turned brown when it
should be green, the ores turned green when they should be brown,
Durotan grimaced. "Several barrels were stolen in the attacks."
"Which clan?"
"Shattered Hand."
Orgrim nodded. The Frostwolf clan was bearing the brunt of the recent flurry of attacks. After the Horde had taken Shattrath.
sightings of the draenei had dwindled. It had been a full six months since anyone had reported even glimpsing one of the elusive
blue-skinned beings. let alone killing one, Durotan had made the Frostwolf clan a clear target when he refused to drink from the
chalice the night Shattrath fell. And even before then, his reluctance to attack the draenei had not gone unnoticed. Now that the
draenei—the only focus the ores had as an outlet for their vastly increased bloodlust—were becoming scarce, many felt that
somehow Durotan was responsible. Never mind that it was quite likely that the draenei had simply been hunted to extinction—that
the initial goal of wiping them off the face of the earth had been achieved.
"I will bring some the next time I see you," Orgrim said.
"I will not take charity."
"If my clan were in your position, you would beat me nearly senseless and shove the food down my throat rather than let me
refuse it," Orgrim said. Durotan laughed and seemed surprised that he did so. Orgrim let himself grin. For a moment, if he could
ignore the dead land around them, the unnatural hue of their skins, it was as if the horrors of the intervening years had not
happened.
Then Durotan's laughter faded, and die present returned. "For the sake of the children. I will accept it." He turned his head, again
looking out over the wasteland. New names were cropping up—harsher names, darker names. The Citadel was becoming known
as the Hcllfirc Citadel, the entire area the Hcllfirc Peninsula.
"The destruction of the draenei will lead to that of the ores as well if something is not done," Durotan said. "We are turning
against each other. Stooping to stealing food from the mouths of children because the land is so wounded it can no longer nourish
us. The demons capering at die heels of the warlocks can destroy and torment, but they cannot heal or feed the starving."
Orgrim asked in a low voice. "Has anyone . . . tried to work with the elements?" Such activities were still forbidden, but Orgrim
knew that desperation was causing some to rethink the old ways,
Durotan nodded. "It was a failure. We have been met with stony silence. Demons guard Oshu'gun. We can find no hope there."
"Then . , . We are finished," Orgrim said quietly. He glanced down at his hammer, its shaft leaning against his leg as they stood.
He wondered if the prophecy of the Doomhammer was being fulfilled even now; if he
was trie last of his line. Had he already brought salvation and then doom by using this weapon to drive the draenei to extinction?
And how could it possibly be used now to bring justice?
When all was dying . . . how could everything change again?
The will to survive was powerful, Gul'dan thought as he readied himself for sleep. He had taken to sleeping in the Black Temple,
in a room he had had redesigned specifically for him. In it. he placed in a ritualized fashion all the trinkets and tools he needed to
properly command the demons he summoned: shards from draenei souls, certain stones for the larger creatures, potions to help
him keep his energy up when it flagged. There were skulls, too, and bones, and other signs of dominance. Certain herbs were
burned in containers, their pungent or sweet aroma inducing visions.
It was to ajar of such that he turned now. He had lit a small fire in a cauldron and permitted the wood to burn down to glowing
embers. Chanting softly, Gul'dan tossed the dried leaves on the fire and forced himself not to cough as the scent filled the air. He
went to his bed—he liked to think that perhaps this was the same bed upon which the loathed Velen slept when he was in the
temple—and quickly fell asleep.
Gul'dan dreamed, as he had not done since Kil'jaeden's departure. And even while in the strange, dark place that was the vision, he
knew it to be true. The vision was that of a vaguely orc-shaped being, dad in a long cloak that obscured his face. He was slender,
even more slender than an orc female, but somehow Gul'dan immediately sensed that it was male. Delicately built as he seemed to
Gul'dan's eyes, the sense of power that radiated from the stranger all but buffeted Gul'dan. A shiver shook him. When the stranger
spoke in his mind, the voice was masculine, oddly pleasant, and profoundly compelling.
"You are feeling adrift and alone," said the stranger.
Gul'dan nodded, cautious and eager at the same time.
"Kil’jaeden promised you power . . . strength . . . godhood. Things that your world has never even seen," continued the smooth
voice from a mouth that remained hidden in the shadow of the cloak's hood. The words caressed Gul'dan. lulled him, and
frightened him at the same time. But he felt more angry than frightened as he spoke.
"He abandoned me," Gul'dan said. "He caused us to ruin our world, and then left us to die with it. If you come from him. then—"
"Nay. nay," soothed the stranger in that oddly compelling voice. "I come from one even greater," His eyes glittered, deep within
the shadow of the hooded cloak. "I come from ... his master."
Gul'dan's skin prickled. "His .. . master?"
And he fell back as his mind was assaulted with images: images of Kil’jaeden and Velen and Archimonde,
as they were long ago. He saw the transformation of the beings known as eredar into monsters and demigods, and he sensed,
though never saw. a great presence behind it all.
"Sargeras!"
He still could not see the stranger's face, but Gul'dan knew that he smiled.
"Yes. The one who rules over all. The one we serve. You will soon understand, Gul'dan, that destruction and oblivion are
beautiful and pure. That it is the direction in which all things must go. You can resist it and be destroyed, or aid it and be
rewarded."
Gautiously, still worried about this cloaked figure and his honeyed words, Gul'dan asked, "What is being asked of me?"
"Your people are dying," the figure said bluntly. "There is nothing left in this world for them to destroy. There is nothing left for
them to survive on. They must go elsewhere. Where there is ample food and drink, and worthy prey to slaughter. The ores hunger
now for so, so much more than food. Give them the blood they crave."
Gul'dan narrowed his eyes. "That sounds like a reward, not a task to which I am set," he said.
"It is both . . . but that is not the only reward my master offers. You rule the Shadow Council, and you have tasted power. You are
the greatest warlock that exists among your people, and you know how that fills you. Imagine if you were ... a god." Gul'dan
trembled. Such had been promised before, but somehow, he knew that this Sargeras was much better able to fulfill such
extravagant vows. He thought ol extending a hand and making the earth tremble, of clenching it hard and stopping a heart. He
thought of the eyes of thousands trained upon him, their voices raw from shouting his name. He thought of tastes and sensations
he could not yet even imagine, and his mouth watered.
"We have a mutual foe," the stranger continued. "I would see them dead. You would see your people sated with slaughter and
killing." And now Gul'dan could make out just the barest hint of features, of pale skin and a thin-lipped mouth framed by black
hair that curved in a smile. "It is a partnership that would benefit us both."
"Indeed," Gul'dan breathed. He realized that he was moving toward the stranger as if drawn, then stopped and added, "but I cannot
believe that this is all you would ask of mc."
The stranger sighed. "Sargeras will give you all this and more. Only ... he lies imprisoned. He needs assistance to escape. His body
is trapped in an ancient tomb, lost beneath a roiling ocean of darkness. He hungers for his freedom, the power that once was his to
express, as your ores hunger for bloodshed, as you hunger for power. Bring your ores into this verdant, unspoiled new world. Give
them soft flesh into which their axes can bite. Defeat the denizens of this place, strengthen your
people, and with this vast green tide of warriors join me in liberating our master. His gratitude—"
Again the sly smile, the glint of white teeth in the beard. And again that powerful buffet of power, mitigated only by the stranger's
will.
"'. . . Well. It is likely beyond even your imaginings, Gul'dan."
Gul'dan considered. As he thought, the image of the stranger shifted and faded. Gul'dan gasped as he stood in a beautiful meadow,
the wind tousling his braided hair. Beasts he had never seen before grazed their fill. Along the horizon, healthy tiecs towered.
Strange beings, similar to ores but with pinkish skin, as slender as the stranger, tended fields and livestock.
Perfect.
The image shifted again. Suddenly he was underwater, swimming down, his lungs not burning for air despite the depth. Kelp
swayed in the current, obscuring but not entirely hiding tumbled columns and a slab that bore strange writing, eroded somewhat
by time and the ceaseless, gentle caress of water. A shudder passed through him as he realized that this was where Sargeras lay.
Release him from this prison, and then ... and then...
It seemed like a good partnership. Anything would be better than staying here in this world, which would mean a slow death. A
beautiful, ripe land, ready for plunder, would all by itself make this bargain worthwhile. And there was so, so much more to come.
He gazed at the stranger raptly. "Tell me what to do."
Gul'dan awoke sprawled on the floor. Beside him on the cold stone was a parchment covered with instructions, written in his own
hand. He scanned it quickly: Portal. Azeroth. Humans.
Medivh.
Gul'dan began to smile.
TWENY-TWO
Can a thing be at once a blessing and a curse? A salvation and a doom? For such I hold what happened next in the history of my
people. From every account, the demonic energies, used so freely and with no heed given as to their cost, leeched all that was
wholesome and life-giving from the world of Draenor. Kil'jaeden had wanted to increase the number of orcs,so that we would become a formidable army, and he had done so, forcing the growth of our younglings and robbing them of their childhood. Now, the
orc population was larger than it had ever been, and there was no way to feed the hungry. It is clear to me, as it must have been
clear to those living through those terrible times, that if we had remained on Draenor, our race would likely have died out.
But how we left. . . and why we left . . . this world still bleeds from the wound of that. I do what I can to heal while still
safeguarding the interests of this new Horde I have made, but I wonder if these wounds will ever really close. Life for my people:
a blessing. How we obtained it: a curse.
The Shadow Council had been nervous, almost as worried sick as Gul'dan had been at Kil’jaeden's departure. But now they had a
direction. He called the Council and shared with them the words of the mysterious stranger who called himself Mcdivh. He spoke
of the fertile fields, clean water, healthy, glossy-coated prey animals. And he spoke even more glowingly of the beings called
"humans," who would fight enough to be a challenge, but who would inevitably fall to the superiority of the Horde.
"Water, food, killing. And power to those who agree to help bring it about," Gul'dan said, his voice seductive, almost purring. He
had gauged them correctly. Their eyes, some red and glowing, some still brown and intense, were focused on him and he saw
hope . . . and greed ... on their faces.
The work began.
First, they had to redirect the attention of the starving Horde. Gul'dan was well aware that, with decreasing food supplies and a
burning thirst for violence that no longer had an outlet, the ores had started attacking one another. He had Blackhand send out
decrees to all the clans, submitting their finest warriors for controlled, one-on-one or small party fights in public display. The
winners would receive food from the losing clan, and a supply of pure
water as well as honor and fame. Frantic for something, anything, to case the pain of their dual hunger, for food and for blood, the
ores responded well to the suggestion, and Gul'dan was relieved. Mcdivh wanted an army to attack the humans. It would not do if
all the ores had slaughtered one another before the invasion.
Durotan continued to give him trouble. The leader of the Frostwolf clan, likely emboldened by the fact that Gul'dan did not cut
him down the night of the attack on Shattrath, had begun speaking out more publicly. He decried the staged battles as demeaning.
He called for a way to try to heal the land, stopping just short of dirccdy blaming the warlocks for it. In other words, he danced as
close to the line as was possible, and sometimes crossed it.
And, as had always been the case, some were listening. While the Frostwolf clan was the only one whose leader had not drunk the
blood of Mannoroth, there were other ores in lower positions who had also refused. The one who worried Gul'dan the most was
Orgrim Doomhammer. That one could be trouble. Orgrim had never much liked Blackhand; one day, he might do something
about that dislike. But for the moment, he did not side publicly with the Frostwolves, and indeed was one of the regular victors in
the champion battles.
The visions continued. Mcdivh had a very clear idea of what he wanted: a portal between the two worlds. one that could be
created with the Shadow Council and its warlocks on one side, and Mcdivh and whatever magics he was controlling on his side.
They could not work in secret; the portal would have to be large in order for the armies Mcdivh wanted to pass through. Besides,
the Horde was feeling defeated. The excitement and challenge of the arena battles and constructing this portal with high ceremony
would give them something to focus on.
Mcdivh was pleased with the idea. In one vision, he assumed the form of a large black bird, perching on Gul'dan's arm. Claws dug
into his flesh and reddish-black blood trickled across green skin, but the pain felt . . . good. There was a small piece of paper rolled
up around the bird's leg. In his vision, Gul'dan unrolled the paper and saw a design that took his breath away. When he awoke, he
sketched it on a large parchment.
He surveyed it, eyes bright with anticipation.
"Beautiful," he said.
"I do not understand your displeasure," Orgrim said one day as he and Durotan sat atop their mounts to survey the building of
what Gul'dan called the Portal. Everywhere Durotan looked, ores were working. The males were bare to the waist, the females
nearly so, and their green skins glistened with sweat underneath a sun that scorched the land. Some of them chanted rhythmic war
cries as they worked, others were focused and silent. The road to this plateau, running in an almost straight line from what was
starting to become known as Hcllfirc Citadel, was already well paved so that construction equipment could be easily moved.
The shapes of the four large platforms were based on draenei design. The irony did not escape Durotan. The original design had
been modified, crowned with the now-familiar spikes and sharp edges that were starting to make orc architecture distinctive. But
Durotan could remember walking up similar steps as a boy, and walking up those steps again with the intent of killing all he found
atop them. Two obelisks pointed into the sky like sharp spears, and a statue of Gul'dan sat atop another one.
But most forbidding of all was the fourth, set a little way back from the other three. This was to be the framework for the actual
Portal that Gul'dan kept promising them would manifest. Two huge slabs of stone towered into the air, a third lying across them to
make the most primitive of gateways. Shapes were starting to appear out of the rock, looming shapes of cowled figures on cither
side, and some sort of serpent undulated atop it.
"Is this not better than having them ride into your camp and slaughter your clansmen?" Orgrim continued.
Durotan nodded. "Yes, in a way," he said. "But we still do not know what this is a portal to." Orgrim gestured at the sere
landscape. The Hcllfire Peninsula was one of the most damaged areas of the world, but far from the only one. "Does it matter? We
know what it is a portal from."
Durotan grunted with a hint of amusement. "I suppose you're right at that."
He felt Orgrim's gray eyes regarding him steadily "Durotan ... I have refrained from asking you this, but . . . why did you refuse
your clan the draft Gul'dan offered?"
Durotan looked at his friend, answering one question with another. "Why did you yourself not drink?" he countered.
"There was something . . . not right," Orgrim said at last. "I did not like what I saw it doing to the others."
Durotan shrugged, hoping his friend would not press the point. "You had the same insight as I did."
"I wonder," said Orgrim. but he did not question further.
Durotan saw no need to reveal what he knew. He had managed to protect his people from the horrors of what drinking demonic
blood would do to them. He had asserted himself to Gul'dan. and thus far. no repercussions had fallen. And Orgrim, ancestors be
praised, had had wisdom enough to realize that there was something amiss and had also declined. For now, that was enough for
Durotan, son of Garad. chieftain of the Frostwolf clan.
"I fight today," Orgrim said, changing the subject. "Will you come?"
"I know that you do this not for glory, but for your clan," Durotan said. "You fight to win them food and water. But I will not
show my face at these . . . displays. Ores should not be fighting ores. Not even in ritualized combat."
Orgrim sighed. "You have not changed, Durotan. You were ever afraid of me defeating you."
There was a hint of mirth in his voice. Durotan turned, and for the first time in many, many long months, grinned with genuine
warmth.
The day had come.
All night, while a ring of warlocks stood guard lest any curious onlooker witness the dark ritual, several stonemasons had been
hard at work carving the final seal into the portal's base. Once they had finished, wiping their sweaty brows and turning to smile at
one another, they had been quickly slain. The blood of those who had created the seal would prime it, Gul'dan had been informed
by Mcdivh. Gul'dan had no reason to doubt his new ally's wisdom. But the luckless masons would not be the last to die here.
The dawn was a fiery one, crimson and orange, and the air was thick and stale. While the portal was being completed over the last
several days, other tasks had been finished as well. The war machines that had so devastated Shattrath several months earlier now
were again pressed into service, repaired, oiled, and tested. Armor that had been neglected was polished, swords were sharpened,
dents hammered out of chest pieces and helms.
The great orcish army that had so decimated the draenei was being reformed.
Some clans had been requested to remain behind. Gul'dan had done his best to convince the chieftains of the Shattered Hand.
Shadowmoon, Thunderlord, Bleeding Hollow, and Laughing Skull clans that they were needed here. Grom and the Warsong had
been particularly hard to convince to remain. For a moment, as the chieftain raged at him, Gul'dan wondered if he had done the
right thing in letting Hcllscrcam drink the demon blood. More than most, he seemed to have little control over his emotions;
despite Gul'dan's flattery about how valuable Grom was to him and how he needed him here, it was Grom's wildncss and unpredictability that made Gul'dan want him to stay behind. He could not risk Grom getting some mad idea into his head and defying
orders. Mcdivh would not like that; he would not like that at all.
Blackhand had requested that the entire Horde gather at the Hcllfirc Citadel. Over the last few days, several who had returned to
their ancestral lands, the Frostwolf clan among them, had trickled in and camped in the area. They had obeyed the order to arm
themselves as if they were going into battle, although few of them understood cxacdy what was going on.
They assembled, clan by clan. Each clan wore their traditional colors in the form of a decorative sash or belt over their armor, and
on this hot. windy day, their banners snapped proudly.
Gul'dan and Ner’zhul watched the assembly. Gul'dan turned to his former mentor. "You and your clan will be among those
staying behind." he said shordy.
Ner’zhul nodded, almost meekly. "So I assumed," he said. He did not say much these days, which was just as well with Gul'dan.
He had half suspected that the older orc would try to wrest control from him after Kil’jaeden had abandoned them, but apparently
Ner’zhul was too crushed to even do that. Gul'dan thought with contempt about the time, not so long ago, when he had idolized
and envied Ner’zhul. How foolish he had been then. He had grown and learned, even from the bitterness of deception. Although
there were times when he thought he caught a faint glimmer of something in Ner’zhul's eyes, as now. He looked sharply at the
other orc and decided it was just a trick of the light. He returned his attention to the assembling clans and smiled.
Even though his designs went far beyond simple bloodletting, he could not help but be stirred at the sight. They were glorious!
The scorching sun glinting on their armor, their banners waving in the wind, their green faces shining with anticipation. If all was
as Mcdivh promised, this could be the turning point to greatness. The drums began. Deep, primal, they shuddered along the earth,
through stone, into the bones of the Horde. Many of them threw back their heads and howled as they began to march, falling
naturally into step with one another, again a unified people.
Gul'dan made no move to hurry. Once they were all assembled at the Portal, he would be magically transported there by another
warlock. He could enjoy watching the parade of his army march down the wide, paved road to the Portal.
Standing in front of the Portal was a draenei child.
Where had they found it? Durotan had not so much as glimpsed a draenei in months; nor had anyone else. They must have
considered it great good luck to have found any draenei, let alone a youngling.
They were in the front of the crowd, standing next to the Thundcrlord clan and the Dragonmaw clan. The Portal gate had been
finished and looked both beautiful and terrifying. Two cloaked figures, whose eyes glowed red cither from magic or clever
technology, flanked the opening. A carved serpentine creature curled about the top, its maw gaping open, showing pointed carved
teeth. It extended sharp, lizardlikc claws and had ridges along its long neck and body. Durotan had never seen anything like this,
and briefly wondered how such an image had occurred to the masons, A nightmare, possibly? He grimaced. All in all, it was a
formidable construction.
But he only barely registered the skill that had gone into its creation. His eyes were transfixed on the young draenei. He looked so
terribly small next to the enormous arch—small, and thin, and bruised. He stared vacantly at the sea of ores who were bellowing
at him, so far beyond terror that he obviously felt nothing.
"What are they going to do with it?" Draka wondered aloud.
Durotan shook his head. "I tear the worst," he said.
She stared at him. "I saw some killing of children in battle," she said. "The bloodlust was upon them— I could not condone it, but
I could see how it could happen, but surely they will not make a ritual sacrifice out of this child!"
"I hope you are right," said Durotan, but he could see no other reason for the small figure to be present. If such were the case, he
could not stand by. He did not want to risk harm to his clan, so he prayed he was wrong.
The warlocks were chanting something now, and to Durotan's amazement, Gul'dan appeared right before their eyes. The Horde
murmured, and Gul'dan smiled benevolently at them.
"Today is a glorious day for the ores!" he cried. "You have all seen this Portal being built, admired the craftsmanship and how it
stands as a monument to the glory of the Horde. Now, I will reveal to you the visions I have had." He pointed at the gate. "Far, far
away, in a land called Azcroth, I have an ally. He offers us his land. It is green and lush, filled with pure water and fat creatures to
hunt. Best of all, we will continue to exult in the glory of bloodshed. A race called 'humans,' the enemy of our ally, will try to stop
us from taking their lands. We will destroy them. Their dark blood will flow freely upon our swords. As we have destroyed the
draenei, so now we will destroy the humans!"
A cheer went up. Draka shook her head in disbelief. "How can they still feel this way? Can they not see this new land will suffer
as ours has if we continue on this path?"
Durotan nodded his agreement. "But at the same time, there is no choice. We need food, water. We must go through this Portal."
Draka sighed, seeing the logic but not liking it.
"Even now, our ally is working to open the Portal on his side. And now. we will begin." He gestured to the little draenei captive.
"Blood is a pure offering to those who give us these vast powers. And the blood of a child is purer still. With the life fluid of our
enemies, we will open the Portal and step into a glorious new world—a new page in the history of the Horde!"
He approached the bound child, who looked up at him with empty eyes. Gul'dan raised a jeweled dagger. It glinted in the sunlight.
"No!"
The word was ripped from Durotan's lips. Everyone turned to stare at him. He surged forward. If this new venture was opened by
the blood of an innocent child, no good could come of it. He did not make it three steps before he was tackled and went down hard
on the sun-baked earth. The instant it happened, he heard Draka utter her war cry and the clang of metal on metal as she charged.
Chaos erupted. He struggled to his feet and beheld the crumpled form of the child. Blue blood spurted from his slashed throat.
"Gul'dan, what have you done to us!" Durotan shrieked, but his protest was lost in the roar of the enraged mob of ores. The
Frostwolves had sprung into action to defend their chieftain, and the shouts of battle were almost deafening. Durotan's breath was
knocked out of his lungs as his attacker—he could not tell from what clan—resumed the fight. In defense, Durotan lifted his axe
and swung. The other dodged, moving more swiftly than Durotan had expected, came up, and
The tenor of the cries abruptly changed as the earth rumbled beneath their feet and a deep, piercing sound shuddered along their
bones. The fighting stopped and as one the ores turned to gaze at the Portal. Moments before, one could look into the area outlined
by the pillars and simply see more of the Hcllfirc Peninsula landscape. Now there was a blackness and a swirl ol stars, as if one
were looking into a night sky gone mad. Even Durotan's eyes were riveted on the sight. As he watched, the blackness shimmered
and reformed itself into a scene that both startled and puzzled him,
Gul'dan had spoken of a beautiful land, rich with fat preybeasts, fertile fields, blue skies. Durotan was indeed looking at a place he
had never seen before, but it was a far cry from the idyllic realm Gul'dan had described. It was as moist as Dracnor now was arid,
A thick haze floated above brackish water and swaying marshland grasses. A buzzing, chirping sound filled the air. At least,
thought Durotan. there was life in this strange place.
Unhappy murmurs ran through die crowd. This was where Gul'dan wanted to send them? It was not much better on first glance
than their own land. But then again. Durotan realized, water meant life. Orange though the sky was, not blue, and drenched though
the land was. not filled with flowers and meadows, it could support life.
He turned to look at Gul'dan as the murmuring rose in volume. Gul'dan was obviously trying to cover his own shock. He waved
his arms for silence.
"Azcroth is a large world, as is our own!" he cried. "You know how different the land can be from place to place. I am certain it is
the same here. This place . . . docs not look as inviting as I was . . ." His voice trailed off and he shook himself, visibly recovering.
"But behold, this is in truth another land! It is real! You!"
Gul'dan pointed at two dozen fully armored ores who stood beside the Portal. They snapped to attention. "You have been chosen
to be tiic first to investigate this new land. Go forth, in the name of the Horde!"
The ores hesitated only an instant, then grimly ran forward into the Portal.
The scene vanished.
Durotan's head whipped around to stare at Gul'dan. The warlock was doing his best to stay composed, but clearly he had been
ratded.
"They are our scouts," Gul'dan said. "They will return with news of this world."
And before the gathered ores could truly begin to grow worried, die image of the swamp reappeared and the ores hurried through.
They were grinning from car to car. More than half of them carried the carcasses of large animals. One was a reptile of some sort,
scaly, long-tailed, with stubby legs and huge jaws. The other was a four-legged, furry thing, with claws on all four of its feet, a
long tail, small rounded ears and spots on its yellow, glossy coat. Both were obviously healthy specimens.
"We have slain and eaten both typ
cs
of creatures," the leader of the scout said. "Their flesh is wholesome. The water there is pure.
We do not need a beautiful land. We need one that will feed and sustain us. This Azcroth will do so admirably, Gul'dan."
A murmur went through the crowed. Despite himself, Durotan felt his gaze drawn to the beasts the scouts had brought through
and his stomach growled. It had been two days since he had eaten. Gul'dan visibly relaxed. He looked over at Durotan, and his
eyes narrowed. Durotan tasted apprehension, sharp and bitter, in his throat.
He and his clan were needed. He knew that. He also knew that his defense of the child—and the reaction it had provoked among
the other clans, many of whom had come to the defense of the Frostwolves— would not be forgotten. He had half suspected that
Gul'dan would order his execution or banishment, but apparendy Durotan and the Frostwolves yet had some use to Gul'dan and
Blackhand.
So be it. For now, he would fight alongside his brethren. Tomorrow would have to take care of itself. Whatever betided, Durotan
knew he would die with his honor intact.
Gul'dan looked back over the crowd of expectant ores and took a deep breath.
"This is the moment of destiny," he said. "On the other side, a new beginning awaits. A new enemy to slaughter. You can feel it,
can you not? The bloodlust rising? Follow Blackhand! Listen to his orders and you will rule this new world as is your right! It's
your world on the other side of the Portal. Take it!"
The cries were deafening. The crowd surged forward. Even Durotan found himself caught up in the thrill of a new world, so lush
and ripe and ready for the taking. Perhaps his worry was misplaced; perhaps this would indeed be a new beginning. Durotan loved
his clan, loved his people. He wanted to see them
thrive. And he, like all ores even before this moment, reveled in the kill.
Perhaps it would all be well.
Axe in hand, hope flourishing in his heart, Durotan joined in the race toward the Portal, toward this place called Azcroth. He lifted
his arms and raised the cry that was on the lips of every orc as they surged forward:
"For the Horde!"
EPILOGUE
And so began our people's history in this world of Azeroth. We thundered out of the Portal like death incarnate, a torrent of
blood-mad killers intent on slaughter. It is little wonder the humans hate us so, many of them even now. But perhaps this history I
have chronicled will one day be read by human, elven, gnomish, and dwarven eyes. Perhaps they will understand a little better
that we, too, knew suffering and victimization.
My father's suspicion that he and his clan were marked for exile proved correct. It was shortly after the Frostwolf clan entered
Azeroth that Gul'dan banished them. They were forced to make their homes in the harshness of the mountains of Alterac. The
white wolves who still hunt in this place are descended from the Frostwolves who followed my clan through the Portal and whose
loyalty could not be swayed by the words of one who bore a grudge.
When I was born, my father realized he had to tell the other ores all he knew about what had been done to them. He
approached his old friend, Orgrim Doomhammer, who believed him and would have allied with him had not my father been
treacherously slain. When I reached adulthood, I became Orgrim's friend, as had my father before; and it is I who have fulfilled
the prophecy of the Doomhammer.
In their honor, this land is named Durotar, its greatest city, Orgrimmar. It is tny hope that—
"My chieftain!" The deep, rough voice belonged to Eitrigg.
Thrall stopped in mid-sentence, moving the pen so it did not drip on the parchment. "What is it?" he asked the elderly orc who
was one of his most trusted advisors.
"There is news—-news from the Alliance. One of our information gatherers has learned something he insists you must know."
Thrall disliked the term "spy," but he had spies nonetheless, as he was certain Jaina Proudmoorc had her spies in his lands. It was
to be expected, and was often worthwhile. Seldom had one of his gatherers insisted on seeing him like this. Something important
must be happening indeed.
"Show him in, and leave us," he said. Eitrigg nodded and a moment later, a small, scrawny, nondescript human male was brought
in. He looked exhausted, undernourished, and terrified.
Thrall rose to his full imposing height without thinking, then realized he might intimidate the human. "Will you take food or
drink?" he asked, keeping his voice gentle.
The spy shook his head, then amended. "W-Water, if you please." in a voice that cracked. The Warchief himself poured a goblet
and handed it to the man, who gulped thirstily, then wiped his mouth with the back of his hand.
"My thanks. Warchief." the spy said, sounding a bit calmer.
"Your news." Thrall said.
The man paled. Thrall sighed inwardly. He would never be so brutal—or so foolish—as to kill a messenger for bringing bad news.
Such behavior merely resulted in no one's wanting to serve as messenger. He smiled in what he hoped was a reassuring fashion.
"Do not fear. Your news, good or ill, is welcome if it aids me in protecting my people." he said.
The man looked slightly less distressed. He took a deep breath.
"My lord," he said. He hesitated, then continued grimly, "The draenei have come to Azcroth."
Thrall was puzzled. He exchanged glances with Eitrigg, who shrugged.
"Some draenei have been in Azcroth for years." he said. "They are nicknamed the lost ones. We know about them. This is not
news, friend."
The man looked stricken. "You don't understand," he said, urgently. "Not those pathetic creatures—
draenei! There—there was ship. From the skies. It crashed like an infernal stone two nights ago."
Thrall inhaled swiftly. No one had missed seeing that strange object in the night sky. looking like a star crashing to earth. So ... it
had not been a star, nor even an infernal. It had been a vessel....
The man was still talking. "Proudmoorc has agreed to aid them. There is one among them—pale, noble, his presence
commanding, though he is not physically strong. They call him Velen."
Thrall stared. The draenei? The Prophet Velen? Here?
He sank slowly in his chair as the full significance struck him.
The worst enemy the ores had ever known had come to Azcroth. Had been welcomed into the Alliance.
How could there possibly be peace between Horde and Alliance now?
"Ancestors save us," Thrall whispered.
